
The Industrial Revolution and its consequences have been a disaster for the human race. They have greatly increased thelife-expectancy of those of us who live in “advanced” countries, but they have destabilized society, have made life unfulfilling,have subjected human beings to indignities, have led to widespread psychological suffering (in the Third World to physicalsuffering as well) and have inflicted severe damage on the natural world. The continued development of technology willworsen the situation. It will certainly subject human being to greater indignities and inflict greater damage on the natural world,it will probably lead to greater social disruption and psychological suffering, and it may lead to increased physical sufferingeven in “advanced” countries.
The industrial-technological system may survive or it may break down. If it survives, it MAY eventually achieve a low levelof physical and psychological suffering, but only after passing through a long and very painful period of adjustment and only atthe cost of permanently reducing human beings and many other living organisms to engineered products and mere cogs in thesocial machine. Furthermore, if the system survives, the consequences will be inevitable: There is no way of reforming ormodifying the system so as to prevent it from depriving people of dignity and autonomy.
If the system breaks down the consequences will still be very painful. But the bigger the system grows the more disastrousthe results of its breakdown will be, so if it is to break down it had best break down sooner rather than later.
We therefore advocate a revolution against the industrial system. This revolution may or may not make use of violence; itmay be sudden or it may be a relatively gradual process spanning a few decades. We can’t predict any of that. But we dooutline in a very general way the measures that those who hate the industrial system should take in order to prepare the way fora revolution against that form of society. This is not to be a POLITICAL revolution. Its object will be to overthrow notgovernments but the economic and technological basis of the present society.
In this article we give attention to only some of the negative developments that have grown out of the industrial-technological system. Other such developments we mention only briefly or ignore altogether. This does not mean that weregard these other developments as unimportant. For practical reasons we have to confine our discussion to areas that havereceived insufficient public attention or in which we have something new to say. For example, since there are well-developedenvironmental and wilderness movements, we have written very little about environmental degradation or the destruction ofwild nature, even though we consider these to be highly important.
Almost everyone will agree that we live in a deeply troubled society. One of the most widespread manifestations of thecraziness of our world is leftism, so a discussion of the psychology of leftism can serve as an introduction to the discussion ofthe problems of modern society in general.
But what is leftism? During the first half of the 20th century leftism could have been practically identified with socialism.Today the movement is fragmented and it is not clear who can properly be called a leftist. When we speak of leftists in thisarticle we have in mind mainly socialists, collectivists, “politically correct” types, feminists, gay and disability activists, animalrights activists and the like. But not everyone who is associated with one of these movements is a leftist. What we are trying toget at in discussing leftism is not so much movement or an ideology as a psychological type, or rather a collection of relatedtypes. Thus, what we mean by “leftism” will emerge more clearly in the course of our discussion of leftist psychology. (Also,see paragraphs 227-230.)
Even so, our conception of leftism will remain a good deal less clear than we would wish, but there doesn’t seem to be anyremedy for this. All we are trying to do here is indicate in a rough and approximate way the two psychological tendencies thatwe believe are the main driving force of modern leftism. We by no means claim to be telling the WHOLE truth about leftistpsychology. Also, our discussion is meant to apply to modern leftism only. We leave open the question of the extent to whichour discussion could be applied to the leftists of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
The two psychological tendencies that underlie modern leftism we call “feelings of inferiority” and “oversocialization.”Feelings of inferiority are characteristic of modern leftism as a whole, while oversocialization is characteristic only of a certainsegment of modern leftism; but this segment is highly influential.
By “feelings of inferiority” we mean not only inferiority feelings in the strict sense but a whole spectrum of related traits;low self-esteem, feelings of powerlessness, depressive tendencies, defeatism, guilt, self-hatred, etc. We argue that modernleftists tend to have some such feelings (possibly more or less repressed) and that these feelings are decisive in determining thedirection of modern leftism.
When someone interprets as derogatory almost anything that is said about him (or about groups with whom he identifies)we conclude that he has inferiority feelings or low self-esteem. This tendency is pronounced among minority rights activists,whether or not they belong to the minority groups whose rights they defend. They are hypersensitive about the words used todesignate minorities and about anything that is said concerning minorities. The terms “Negro,” “oriental,” “handicapped” or“chick” for an African, an Asian, a disabled person or a woman originally had no derogatory connotation. “Broad” and “chick”were merely the feminine equivalents of “guy,” “dude” or “fellow.” The negative connotations have been attached to theseterms by the activists themselves. Some animal rights activists have gone so far as to reject the word “pet” and insist on itsreplacement by “animal companion.” Leftish anthropologists go to great lengths to avoid saying anything about primitivepeoples that could conceivably be interpreted as negative. They want to replace the word “primitive” by “nonliterate.” Theymay seem almost paranoid about anything that might suggest that any primitive culture is inferior to ours. (We do not mean toimply that primitive cultures ARE inferior to ours. We merely point out the hyper sensitivity of leftish anthropologists.)
Those who are most sensitive about “politically incorrect” terminology are not the average black ghetto-dweller, Asianimmigrant, abused woman or disabled person, but a minority of activists, many of whom do not even belong to any“oppressed” group but come from privileged strata of society. Political correctness has its stronghold among universityprofessors, who have secure employment with comfortable salaries, and the majority of whom are heterosexual white malesfrom middle- to upper-middle-class families.
Many leftists have an intense identification with the problems of groups that have an image of being weak (women),defeated (American Indians), repellent (homosexuals) or otherwise inferior. The leftists themselves feel that these groups areinferior. They would never admit to themselves that they have such feelings, but it is precisely because they do see thesegroups as inferior that they identify with their problems. (We do not mean to suggest that women, Indians, etc. ARE inferior;we are only making a point about leftist psychology.)
Feminists are desperately anxious to prove that women are as strong and as capable as men. Clearly they are nagged by afear that women may NOT be as strong and as capable as men.
Leftists tend to hate anything that has an image of being strong, good and successful. They hate America, they hateWestern civilization, they hate white males, they hate rationality. The reasons that leftists give for hating the West, etc. clearlydo not correspond with their real motives. They SAY they hate the West because it is warlike, imperialistic, sexist, ethnocentricand so forth, but where these same faults appear in socialist countries or in primitive cultures, the leftist finds excuses for them,or at best he GRUDGINGLY admits that they exist; whereas he ENTHUSIASTICALLY points out (and often greatlyexaggerates) these faults where they appear in Western civilization. Thus it is clear that these faults are not the leftist’s realmotive for hating America and the West. He hates America and the West because they are strong and successful.
Words like “self-confidence,” “self-reliance,” “initiative,” “enterprise,” “optimism,” etc., play little role in the liberal andleftist vocabulary. The leftist is anti-individualistic, pro-collectivist. He wants society to solve every one’s problems for them,satisfy everyone’s needs for them, take care of them. He is not the sort of person who has an inner sense of confidence in hisability to solve his own problems and satisfy his own needs. The leftist is antagonistic to the concept of competition because,deep inside, he feels like a loser.
Art forms that appeal to modern leftish intellectuals tend to focus on sordidness, defeat and despair, or else they take anorgiastic tone, throwing off rational control as if there were no hope of accomplishing anything through rational calculation andall that was left was to immerse oneself in the sensations of the moment.
Modern leftish philosophers tend to dismiss reason, science, objective reality and to insist that everything is culturallyrelative. It is true that one can ask serious questions about the foundations of scientific knowledge and about how, if at all, theconcept of objective reality can be defined. But it is obvious that modern leftish philosophers are not simply cool-headedlogicians systematically analyzing the foundations of knowledge. They are deeply involved emotionally in their attack on truthand reality. They attack these concepts because of their own psychological needs. For one thing, their attack is an outlet forhostility, and, to the extent that it is successful, it satisfies the drive for power. More importantly, the leftist hates science andrationality because they classify certain beliefs as true (i.e., successful, superior) and other beliefs as false (i.e., failed, inferior).The leftist’s feelings of inferiority run so deep that he cannot tolerate any classification of some things as successful or superiorand other things as failed or inferior. This also underlies the rejection by many leftists of the concept of mental illness and ofthe utility of IQ tests. Leftists are antagonistic to genetic explanations of human abilities or behavior because such explanationstend to make some persons appear superior or inferior to others. Leftists prefer to give society the credit or blame for anindividual’s ability or lack of it. Thus if a person is “inferior” it is not his fault, but society’s, because he has not been broughtup properly.
The leftist is not typically the kind of person whose feelings of inferiority make him a braggart, an egotist, a bully, a self-promoter, a ruthless competitor. This kind of person has not wholly lost faith in himself. He has a deficit in his sense of powerand self-worth, but he can still conceive of himself as having the capacity to be strong, and his efforts to make himself strongproduce his unpleasant behavior. [
But the leftist is too far gone for that. His feelings of inferiority are so ingrained that hecannot conceive of himself as individually strong and valuable. Hence the collectivism of the leftist. He can feel strong only asa member of a large organization or a mass movement with which he identifies himself.
Notice the masochistic tendency of leftist tactics. Leftists protest by lying down in front of vehicles, they intentionallyprovoke police or racists to abuse them, etc. These tactics may often be effective, but many leftists use them not as a means toan end but because they PREFER masochistic tactics. Self-hatred is a leftist trait.
Leftists may claim that their activism is motivated by compassion or by moral principles, and moral principle does play arole for the leftist of the oversocialized type. But compassion and moral principle cannot be the main motives for leftistactivism. Hostility is too prominent a component of leftist behavior; so is the drive for power. Moreover, much leftist behavioris not rationally calculated to be of benefit to the people whom the leftists claim to be trying to help. For example, if onebelieves that affirmative action is good for black people, does it make sense to demand affirmative action in hostile ordogmatic terms? Obviously it would be more productive to take a diplomatic and conciliatory approach that would make atleast verbal and symbolic concessions to white people who think that affirmative action discriminates against them. But leftistactivists do not take such an approach because it would not satisfy their emotional needs. Helping black people is not their realgoal. Instead, race problems serve as an excuse for them to express their own hostility and frustrated need for power. In doingso they actually harm black people, because the activists’ hostile attitude toward the white majority tends to intensify racehatred.
If our society had no social problems at all, the leftists would have to INVENT problems in order to provide themselveswith an excuse for making a fuss.
We emphasize that the foregoing does not pretend to be an accurate description of everyone who might be considered aleftist. It is only a rough indication of a general tendency of leftism.
Psychologists use the term “socialization” to designate the process by which children are trained to think and act as societydemands. A person is said to be well socialized if he believes in and obeys the moral code of his society and fits in well as afunctioning part of that society. It may seem senseless to say that many leftists are over-socialized, since the leftist isperceived as a rebel. Nevertheless, the position can be defended. Many leftists are not such rebels as they seem.
The moral code of our society is so demanding that no one can think, feel and act in a completely moral way. For example,we are not supposed to hate anyone, yet almost everyone hates somebody at some time or other, whether he admits it to himselfor not. Some people are so highly socialized that the attempt to think, feel and act morally imposes a severe burden on them. Inorder to avoid feelings of guilt, they continually have to deceive themselves about their own motives and find moralexplanations for feelings and actions that in reality have a nonmoral origin. We use the term “oversocialized” to describe suchpeople. [2]
Oversocialization can lead to low self-esteem, a sense of powerlessness, defeatism, guilt, etc. One of the most importantmeans by which our society socializes children is by making them feel ashamed of behavior or speech that is contrary tosociety’s expectations. If this is overdone, or if a particular child is especially susceptible to such feelings, he ends by feelingashamed of HIMSELF. Moreover the thought and the behavior of the oversocialized person are more restricted by society’sexpectations than are those of the lightly socialized person. The majority of people engage in a significant amount of naughtybehavior. They lie, they commit petty thefts, they break traffic laws, they goof off at work, they hate someone, they say spitefulthings or they use some underhanded trick to get ahead of the other guy. The oversocialized person cannot do these things, or ifhe does do them he generates in himself a sense of shame and self-hatred. The oversocialized person cannot even experience,without guilt, thoughts or feelings that are contrary to the accepted morality; he cannot think “unclean” thoughts. Andsocialization is not just a matter of morality; we are socialized to conform to many norms of behavior that do not fall under theheading of morality. Thus the oversocialized person is kept on a psychological leash and spends his life running on rails thatsociety has laid down for him. In many oversocialized people this results in a sense of constraint and powerlessness that can bea severe hardship. We suggest that oversocialization is among the more serious cruelties that human being inflict on oneanother.
We argue that a very important and influential segment of the modern left is oversocialized and that their oversocializationis of great importance in determining the direction of modern leftism. Leftists of the oversocialized type tend to be intellectualsor members of the upper-middle class. Notice that university intellectuals [
constitute the most highly socialized segment ofour society and also the most leftwing segment.
The leftist of the oversocialized type tries to get off his psychological leash and assert his autonomy by rebelling. Butusually he is not strong enough to rebel against the most basic values of society. Generally speaking, the goals of today’sleftists are NOT in conflict with the accepted morality. On the contrary, the left takes an accepted moral principle, adopts it asits own, and then accuses mainstream society of violating that principle. Examples: racial equality, equality of the sexes,helping poor people, peace as opposed to war, nonviolence generally, freedom of expression, kindness to animals. Morefundamentally, the duty of the individual to serve society and the duty of society to take care of the individual. All these havebeen deeply rooted values of our society (or at least of its middle and upper classes [
for a long time. These values areexplicitly or implicitly expressed or presupposed in most of the material presented to us by the mainstream communicationsmedia and the educational system. Leftists, especially those of the oversocialized type, usually do not rebel against theseprinciples but justify their hostility to society by claiming (with some degree of truth) that society is not living up to theseprinciples.
Here is an illustration of the way in which the oversocialized leftist shows his real attachment to the conventional attitudesof our society while pretending to be in rebellion against it. Many leftists push for affirmative action, for moving black peopleinto high-prestige jobs, for improved education in black schools and more money for such schools; the way of life of the black“underclass” they regard as a social disgrace. They want to integrate the black man into the system, make him a businessexecutive, a lawyer, a scientist just like upper-middle-class white people. The leftists will reply that the last thing they want isto make the black man into a copy of the white man; instead, they want to preserve African American culture. But in what doeslistening to black-style music, wearing black-style clothing and going to a black-style church or mosque. In other words, it canexpress itself only in superficial matters. In all ESSENTIAL respects most leftists of the oversocialized type want to make theblack man conform to white, middle-class ideals. They want to make him study technical subjects, become an executive or ascientist, spend his life climbing the status ladder to prove that black people are as good as white. They want to make blackfathers “responsible,” they want black gangs to become nonviolent, etc. But these are exactly the values of the industrial-technological system. The system couldn’t care less what kind of music a man listens to, what kind of clothes he wears or whatreligion he believes in as long as he studies in school, holds a respectable job, climbs the status ladder, is a “responsible”parent, is nonviolent and so forth. In effect, however much he may deny it, the oversocialized leftist wants to integrate theblack man into the system and make him adopt its values.
We certainly do not claim that leftists, even of the oversocialized type, NEVER rebel against the fundamental values of oursociety. Clearly they sometimes do. Some oversocialized leftists have gone so far as to rebel against one of modern society’smost important principles by engaging in physical violence. By their own account, violence is for them a form of “liberation.”In other words, by committing violence they break through the psychological restraints that have been trained into them.Because they are oversocialized these restraints have been more confining for them than for others; hence their need to breakfree of them. But they usually justify their rebellion in terms of mainstream values. If they engage in violence they claim to befighting against racism or the like.
We realize that many objections could be raised to the foregoing thumbnail sketch of leftist psychology. The real situationis complex, and anything like a complete description of it would take several volumes even if the necessary data wereavailable. We claim only to have indicated very roughly the two most important tendencies in the psychology of modernleftism.
The problems of the leftist are indicative of the problems of our society as a whole. Low self-esteem, depressive tendenciesand defeatism are not restricted to the left. Though they are especially noticeable in the left, they are widespread in our society.And today’s society tries to socialize us to a greater extent than any previous society. We are even told by experts how to eat,how to exercise, how to make love, how to raise our kids and so forth.
Human beings have a need (probably based in biology) for something that we will call the “power process.” This is closelyrelated to the need for power (which is widely recognized) but is not quite the same thing. The power process has fourelements. The three most clear-cut of these we call goal, effort and attainment of goal. (Everyone needs to have goals whoseattainment requires effort, and needs to succeed in attaining at least some of his goals.) The fourth element is more difficult todefine and may not be necessary for everyone. We call it autonomy and will discuss it later (paragraphs 42-44).
Consider the hypothetical case of a man who can have anything he wants just by wishing for it. Such a man has power, buthe will develop serious psychological problems. At first he will have a lot of fun, but by and by he will become acutely boredand demoralized. Eventually he may become clinically depressed. History shows that leisured aristocracies tend to becomedecadent. This is not true of fighting aristocracies that have to struggle to maintain their power. But leisured, securearistocracies that have no need to exert themselves usually become bored, hedonistic and demoralized, even though they havepower. This shows that power is not enough. One must have goals toward which to exercise one’s power.
Everyone has goals; if nothing else, to obtain the physical necessities of life: food, water and whatever clothing and shelterare made necessary by the climate. But the leisured aristocrat obtains these things without effort. Hence his boredom anddemoralization.
Nonattainment of important goals results in death if the goals are physical necessities, and in frustration if nonattainment ofthe goals is compatible with survival. Consistent failure to attain goals throughout life results in defeatism, low self-esteem ordepression.
Thus, in order to avoid serious psychological problems, a human being needs goals whose attainment requires effort, andhe must have a reasonable rate of success in attaining his goals.
But not every leisured aristocrat becomes bored and demoralized. For example, the emperor Hirohito, instead of sinkinginto decadent hedonism, devoted himself to marine biology, a field in which he became distinguished. When people do nothave to exert themselves to satisfy their physical needs they often set up artificial goals for themselves. In many cases they thenpursue these goals with the same energy and emotional involvement that they otherwise would have put into the search forphysical necessities. Thus the aristocrats of the Roman Empire had their literary pretensions; many European aristocrats a fewcenturies ago invested tremendous time and energy in hunting, though they certainly didn’t need the meat; other aristocracieshave competed for status through elaborate displays of wealth; and a few aristocrats, like Hirohito, have turned to science.
We use the term “surrogate activity” to designate an activity that is directed toward an artificial goal that people set up forthemselves merely in order to have some goal to work toward, or let us say, merely for the sake of the “fulfillment” that theyget from pursuing the goal. Here is a rule of thumb for the identification of surrogate activities. Given a person who devotesmuch time and energy to the pursuit of goal X, ask yourself this: If he had to devote most of his time and energy to satisfyinghis biological needs, and if that effort required him to use his physical and mental faculties in a varied and interesting way,would he feel seriously deprived because he did not attain goal X? If the answer is no, then the person’s pursuit of goal X is asurrogate activity. Hirohito’s studies in marine biology clearly constituted a surrogate activity, since it is pretty certain that ifHirohito had had to spend his time working at interesting non-scientific tasks in order to obtain the necessities of life, he wouldnot have felt deprived because he didn’t know all about the anatomy and life-cycles of marine animals. On the other hand thepursuit of sex and love (for example) is not a surrogate activity, because most people, even if their existence were otherwisesatisfactory, would feel deprived if they passed their lives without ever having a relationship with a member of the oppositesex. (But pursuit of an excessive amount of sex, more than one really needs, can be a surrogate activity.)
In modern industrial society only minimal effort is necessary to satisfy one’s physical needs. It is enough to go through atraining program to acquire some petty technical skill, then come to work on time and exert the very modest effort needed tohold a job. The only requirements are a moderate amount of intelligence and, most of all, simple OBEDIENCE. If one hasthose, society takes care of one from cradle to grave. (Yes, there is an underclass that cannot take the physical necessities forgranted, but we are speaking here of mainstream society.) Thus it is not surprising that modern society is full of surrogateactivities. These include scientific work, athletic achievement, humanitarian work, artistic and literary creation, climbing thecorporate ladder, acquisition of money and material goods far beyond the point at which they cease to give any additionalphysical satisfaction, and social activism when it addresses issues that are not important for the activist personally, as in thecase of white activists who work for the rights of nonwhite minorities. These are not always PURE surrogate activities, sincefor many people they may be motivated in part by needs other than the need to have some goal to pursue. Scientific work maybe motivated in part by a drive for prestige, artistic creation by a need to express feelings, militant social activism by hostility.But for most people who pursue them, these activities are in large part surrogate activities. For example, the majority ofscientists will probably agree that the “fulfillment” they get from their work is more important than the money and prestigethey earn.
For many if not most people, surrogate activities are less satisfying than the pursuit of real goals (that is, goals that peoplewould want to attain even if their need for the power process were already fulfilled). One indication of this is the fact that, inmany or most cases, people who are deeply involved in surrogate activities are never satisfied, never at rest. Thus the money-maker constantly strives for more and more wealth. The scientist no sooner solves one problem than he moves on to the next.The long-distance runner drives himself to run always farther and faster. Many people who pursue surrogate activities will saythat they get far more fulfillment from these activities than they do from the “mundane” business of satisfying their biologicalneeds, but that is because in our society the effort needed to satisfy the biological needs has been reduced to triviality. Moreimportantly, in our society people do not satisfy their biological needs AUTONOMOUSLY but by functioning as parts of animmense social machine. In contrast, people generally have a great deal of autonomy in pursuing their surrogate activities.
Autonomy as a part of the power process may not be necessary for every individual. But most people need a greater orlesser degree of autonomy in working toward their goals. Their efforts must be undertaken on their own initiative and must beunder their own direction and control. Yet most people do not have to exert this initiative, direction and control as singleindividuals. It is usually enough to act as a member of a SMALL group. Thus if half a dozen people discuss a goal amongthemselves and make a successful joint effort to attain that goal, their need for the power process will be served. But if theywork under rigid orders handed down from above that leave them no room for autonomous decision and initiative, then theirneed for the power process will not be served. The same is true when decisions are made on a collective basis if the groupmaking the collective decision is so large that the role of each individual is insignificant. [5]
It is true that some individuals seem to have little need for autonomy. Either their drive for power is weak or they satisfy itby identifying themselves with some powerful organization to which they belong. And then there are unthinking, animal typeswho seem to be satisfied with a purely physical sense of power (the good combat soldier, who gets his sense of power bydeveloping fighting skills that he is quite content to use in blind obedience to his superiors).
But for most people it is through the power process having a goal, making an AUTONOMOUS effort and attaining the goal-- that self-esteem, self-confidence and a sense of power are acquired. When one does not have adequate opportunity to gothrough the power process the consequences are (depending on the individual and on the way the power process is disrupted)boredom, demoralization, low self-esteem, inferiority feelings, defeatism, depression, anxiety, guilt, frustration, hostility,spouse or child abuse, insatiable hedonism, abnormal sexual behavior, sleep disorders, eating disorders. etc. [6]
Any of the foregoing symptoms can occur in any society, but in modern industrial society they are present on a massivescale. We aren’t the first to mention that the world today seems to be going crazy. This sort of thing is not normal for humansocieties. There is good reason to believe that primitive man suffered from less stress and frustration and was better satisfiedwith his way of life than modern man is. It is true that not all was sweetness and light in primitive societies. Abuse of womenwas common among the Australian aborigines, transexuality was fairly common among some of the American Indian tribes.But it does appear that GENERALLY SPEAKING the kinds of problems that we have listed in the preceding paragraph werefar less common among primitive peoples than they are in modern society.
We attribute the social and psychological problems of modern society to the fact that that society requires people to liveunder conditions radically different from those under which the human race evolved and to behave in ways that conflict withthe patterns of behavior that the human race developed while living under the earlier conditions. It is clear from what we havealready written that we consider lack of opportunity to properly experience the power process as the most important of theabnormal conditions to which modern society subjects people. But it is not the only one. Before dealing with disruption of thepower process as a source of social problems we will discuss some of the other sources.
Among the abnormal conditions present in modern industrial society are excessive density of population, isolation of manfrom nature, excessive rapidity of social change and the breakdown of natural small-scale communities such as the extendedfamily, the village or the tribe.
It is well known that crowding increases stress and aggression. The degree of crowding that exists today and the isolationof man from nature are consequences of technological progress. All pre-industrial societies were predominantly rural. TheIndustrial Revolution vastly increased the size of cities and the proportion of the population that lives in them, and modernagricultural technology has made it possible for the Earth to support a far denser population than it ever did before. (Also,technology exacerbates the effects of crowding because it puts increased disruptive powers in people’s hands. For example, avariety of noise-making devices: power mowers, radios, motorcycles, etc. If the use of these devices is unrestricted, peoplewho want peace and quiet are frustrated by the noise. If their use is restricted, people who use the devices are frustrated by theregulations. But if these machines had never been invented there would have been no conflict and no frustration generated bythem.)
For primitive societies the natural world (which usually changes only slowly) provided a stable framework and therefore asense of security. In the modern world it is human society that dominates nature rather than the other way around, and modernsociety changes very rapidly owing to technological change. Thus there is no stable framework.
The conservatives are fools: They whine about the decay of traditional values, yet they enthusiastically supporttechnological progress and economic growth. Apparently it never occurs to them that you can’t make rapid, drastic changes inthe technology and the economy of a society without causing rapid changes in all other aspects of the society as well, and thatsuch rapid changes inevitably break down traditional values.
The breakdown of traditional values to some extent implies the breakdown of the bonds that hold together traditional small-scale social groups. The disintegration of small-scale social groups is also promoted by the fact that modern conditions oftenrequire or tempt individuals to move to new locations, separating themselves from their communities. Beyond that, atechnological society HAS TO weaken family ties and local communities if it is to function efficiently. In modern society anindividual’s loyalty must be first to the system and only secondarily to a smallscale community, because if the internal loyaltiesof small-scale communities were stronger than loyalty to the system, such communities would pursue their own advantage atthe expense of the system.
Suppose that a public official or a corporation executive appoints his cousin, his friend or his co-religionist to a positionrather than appointing the person best qualified for the job. He has permitted personal loyalty to supersede his loyalty to thesystem, and that is “nepotism” or “discrimination,” both of which are terrible sins in modern society. Would-be industrialsocieties that have done a poor job of subordinating personal or local loyalties to loyalty to the system are usually veryinefficient. (Look at Latin America.) Thus an advanced industrial society can tolerate only those small-scale communities thatare emasculated, tamed and made into tools of the system. [7]
Crowding, rapid change and the breakdown of communities have been widely recognized as sources of social problems.But we do not believe they are enough to account for the extent of the problems that are seen today.
A few pre-industrial cities were very large and crowded, yet their inhabitants do not seem to have suffered frompsychological problems to the same extent as modern man. In America today there still are uncrowded rural areas, and we findthere the same problems as in urban areas, though the problems tend to be less acute in the rural areas. Thus crowding does notseem to be the decisive factor.
On the growing edge of the American frontier during the 19th century, the mobility of the population probably broke downextended families and small-scale social groups to at least the same extent as these are broken down today. In fact, manynuclear families lived by choice in such isolation, having no neighbors within several miles, that they belonged to nocommunity at all, yet they do not seem to have developed problems as a result.
Furthermore, change in American frontier society was very rapid and deep. A man might be born and raised in a log cabin,outside the reach of law and order and fed largely on wild meat; and by the time he arrived at old age he might be working at aregular job and living in an ordered community with effective law enforcement. This was a deeper change than that whichtypically occurs in the life of a modern individual, yet it does not seem to have led to psychological problems. In fact, 19thcentury American society had an optimistic and self-confident tone, quite unlike that of today’s society. [8]
The difference, we argue, is that modern man has the sense (largely justified) that change is IMPOSED on him, whereas the19th century frontiersman had the sense (also largely justified) that he created change himself, by his own choice. Thus apioneer settled on a piece of land of his own choosing and made it into a farm through his own effort. In those days an entirecounty might have only a couple of hundred inhabitants and was a far more isolated and autonomous entity than a moderncounty is. Hence the pioneer farmer participated as a member of a relatively small group in the creation of a new, orderedcommunity. One may well question whether the creation of this community was an improvement, but at any rate it satisfied thepioneer’s need for the power process.
It would be possible to give other examples of societies in which there has been rapid change and/or lack of closecommunity ties without the kind of massive behavioral aberration that is seen in today’s industrial society. We contend that themost important cause of social and psychological problems in modern society is the fact that people have insufficientopportunity to go through the power process in a normal way. We don’t mean to say that modern society is the only one inwhich the power process has been disrupted. Probably most if not all civilized societies have interfered with the power processto a greater or lesser extent. But in modern industrial society the problem has become particularly acute. Leftism, at least in itsrecent (mid- to late-20th century) form, is in part a symptom of deprivation with respect to the power process.
We divide human drives into three groups: (
those drives that can be satisfied with minimal effort; (
those that can besatisfied but only at the cost of serious effort; (
those that cannot be adequately satisfied no matter how much effort onemakes. The power process is the process of satisfying the drives of the second group. The more drives there are in the thirdgroup, the more there is frustration, anger, eventually defeatism, depression, etc.
In modern industrial society natural human drives tend to be pushed into the first and third groups, and the second grouptends to consist increasingly of artificially created drives.
In primitive societies, physical necessities generally fall into group 
They can be obtained, but only at the cost of seriouseffort. But modern society tends to guaranty the physical necessities to everyone [
in exchange for only minimal effort, hencephysical needs are pushed into group 
(There may be disagreement about whether the effort needed to hold a job is“minimal”; but usually, in lower- to middle-level jobs, whatever effort is required is merely that of OBEDIENCE. You sit orstand where you are told to sit or stand and do what you are told to do in the way you are told to do it. Seldom do you have toexert yourself seriously, and in any case you have hardly any autonomy in work, so that the need for the power process is notwell served.)
Social needs, such as sex, love and status, often remain in group 2 in modern society, depending on the situation of theindividual. [
But, except for people who have a particularly strong drive for status, the effort required to fulfill the socialdrives is insufficient to satisfy adequately the need for the power process.
So certain artificial needs have been created that fall into group 
hence serve the need for the power process. Advertisingand marketing techniques have been developed that make many people feel they need things that their grandparents neverdesired or even dreamed of. It requires serious effort to earn enough money to satisfy these artificial needs, hence they fall intogroup 
(But see paragraphs 80-82.) Modern man must satisfy his need for the power process largely through pursuit of theartificial needs created by the advertising and marketing industry [11], and through surrogate activities.
It seems that for many people, maybe the majority, these artificial forms of the power process are insufficient. A theme thatappears repeatedly in the writings of the social critics of the second half of the 20th century is the sense of purposelessness thatafflicts many people in modern society. (This purposelessness is often called by other names such as “anomie” or “middle-class vacuity.”) We suggest that the so-called “identity crisis” is actually a search for a sense of purpose, often for commitmentto a suitable surrogate activity. It may be that existentialism is in large part a response to the purposelessness of modern life.[
Very widespread in modern society is the search for “fulfillment.” But we think that for the majority of people an activitywhose main goal is fulfillment (that is, a surrogate activity) does not bring completely satisfactory fulfillment. In other words,it does not fully satisfy the need for the power process. (See paragraph 41.) That need can be fully satisfied only throughactivities that have some external goal, such as physical necessities, sex, love, status, revenge, etc.
Moreover, where goals are pursued through earning money, climbing the status ladder or functioning as part of the systemin some other way, most people are not in a position to pursue their goals AUTONOMOUSLY. Most workers are someoneelse’s employee and, as we pointed out in paragraph 
must spend their days doing what they are told to do in the way theyare told to do it. Even people who are in business for themselves have only limited autonomy. It is a chronic complaint ofsmall-business persons and entrepreneurs that their hands are tied by excessive government regulation. Some of theseregulations are doubtless unnecessary, but for the most part government regulations are essential and inevitable parts of ourextremely complex society. A large portion of small business today operates on the franchise system. It was reported in theWall Street Journal a few years ago that many of the franchise-granting companies require applicants for franchises to take apersonality test that is designed to EXCLUDE those who have creativity and initiative, because such persons are notsufficiently docile to go along obediently with the franchise system. This excludes from small business many of the people whomost need autonomy.
Today people live more by virtue of what the system does FOR them or TO them than by virtue of what they do forthemselves. And what they do for themselves is done more and more along channels laid down by the system. Opportunitiestend to be those that the system provides, the opportunities must be exploited in accord with rules and regulations [13], andtechniques prescribed by experts must be followed if there is to be a chance of success.
Thus the power process is disrupted in our society through a deficiency of real goals and a deficiency of autonomy in thepursuit of goals. But it is also disrupted because of those human drives that fall into group 
the drives that one cannotadequately satisfy no matter how much effort one makes. One of these drives is the need for security. Our lives depend ondecisions made by other people; we have no control over these decisions and usually we do not even know the people whomake them. (“We live in a world in which relatively few people -- maybe 
or 1,
make the important decisions” -- PhilipB. Heymann of Harvard Law School, quoted by Anthony Lewis, New York Times, April 21,1995.) Our lives depend onwhether safety standards at a nuclear power plant are properly maintained; on how much pesticide is allowed to get into ourfood or how much pollution into our air; on how skillful (or incompetent) our doctor is; whether we lose or get a job maydepend on decisions made by government economists or corporation executives; and so forth. Most individuals are not in aposition to secure themselves against these threats to more [than] a very limited extent. The individual’s search for security istherefore frustrated, which leads to a sense of powerlessness.
It may be objected that primitive man is physically less secure than modern man, as is shown by his shorter life expectancy;hence modern man suffers from less, not more than the amount of insecurity that is normal for human beings. Butpsychological security does not closely correspond with physical security. What makes us FEEL secure is not so muchobjective security as a sense of confidence in our ability to take care of ourselves. Primitive man, threatened by a fierce animalor by hunger, can fight in self-defense or travel in search of food. He has no certainty of success in these efforts, but he is by nomeans helpless against the things that threaten him. The modern individual on the other hand is threatened by many thingsagainst which he is helpless: nuclear accidents, carcinogens in food, environmental pollution, war, increasing taxes, invasion ofhis privacy by large organizations, nationwide social or economic phenomena that may disrupt his way of life.
It is true that primitive man is powerless against some of the things that threaten him; disease for example. But he canaccept the risk of disease stoically. It is part of the nature of things, it is no one’s fault, unless it is the fault of some imaginary,impersonal demon. But threats to the modern individual tend to be MAN-MADE. They are not the results of chance but areIMPOSED on him by other persons whose decisions he, as an individual, is unable to influence. Consequently he feelsfrustrated, humiliated and angry.
Thus primitive man for the most part has his security in his own hands (either as an individual or as a member of a SMALLgroup) whereas the security of modern man is in the hands of persons or organizations that are too remote or too large for himto be able personally to influence them. So modern man’s drive for security tends to fall into groups 1 and 
in some areas(food, shelter etc.) his security is assured at the cost of only trivial effort, whereas in other areas he CANNOT attain security.(The foregoing greatly simplifies the real situation, but it does indicate in a rough, general way how the condition of modernman differs from that of primitive man.)
People have many transitory drives or impulses that are necessarily frustrated in modern life, hence fall into group 
Onemay become angry, but modern society cannot permit fighting. In many situations it does not even permit verbal aggression.When going somewhere one may be in a hurry, or one may be in a mood to travel slowly, but one generally has no choice butto move with the flow of traffic and obey the traffic signals. One may want to do one’s work in a different way, but usually onecan work only according to the rules laid down by one’s employer. In many other ways as well, modern man is strapped downby a network of rules and regulations (explicit or implicit) that frustrate many of his impulses and thus interfere with the powerprocess. Most of these regulations cannot be dispensed with, because they are necessary for the functioning of industrialsociety.
Modern society is in certain respects extremely permissive. In matters that are irrelevant to the functioning of the systemwe can generally do what we please. We can believe in any religion (as long as it does not encourage behavior that isdangerous to the system). We can go to bed with anyone we like (as long as we practice “safe sex”). We can do anything welike as long as it is UNIMPORTANT. But in all IMPORTANT matters the system tends increasingly to regulate our behavior.
Behavior is regulated not only through explicit rules and not only by the government. Control is often exercised throughindirect coercion or through psychological pressure or manipulation, and by organizations other than the government, or by thesystem as a whole. Most large organizations use some form of propaganda [
to manipulate public attitudes or behavior.Propaganda is not limited to “commercials” and advertisements, and sometimes it is not even consciously intended aspropaganda by the people who make it. For instance, the content of entertainment programming is a powerful form ofpropaganda. An example of indirect coercion: There is no law that says we have to go to work every day and follow ouremployer’s orders. Legally there is nothing to prevent us from going to live in the wild like primitive people or from going intobusiness for ourselves. But in practice there is very little wild country left, and there is room in the economy for only a limitednumber of small business owners. Hence most of us can survive only as someone else’s employee.
We suggest that modern man’s obsession with longevity, and with maintaining physical vigor and sexual attractiveness toan advanced age, is a symptom of unfulfillment resulting from deprivation with respect to the power process. The “mid-lifecrisis” also is such a symptom. So is the lack of interest in having children that is fairly common in modern society but almostunheard-of in primitive societies.
In primitive societies life is a succession of stages. The needs and purposes of one stage having been fulfilled, there is noparticular reluctance about passing on to the next stage. A young man goes through the power process by becoming a hunter,hunting not for sport or for fulfillment but to get meat that is necessary for food. (In young women the process is morecomplex, with greater emphasis on social power; we won’t discuss that here.) This phase having been successfully passedthrough, the young man has no reluctance about settling down to the responsibilities of raising a family. (In contrast, somemodern people indefinitely postpone having children because they are too busy seeking some kind of “fulfillment.” We suggestthat the fulfillment they need is adequate experience of the power process -- with real goals instead of the artificial goals ofsurrogate activities.) Again, having successfully raised his children, going through the power process by providing them withthe physical necessities, the primitive man feels that his work is done and he is prepared to accept old age (if he survives thatlong) and death. any modern people, on the other hand, are disturbed by the prospect of physical deterioration and death, as isshown by the amount of effort they expend trying to maintain their physical condition, appearance and health. We argue thatthis is due to unfulfillment resulting from the fact that they have never put their physical powers to any practical use, havenever gone through the power process using their bodies in a serious way. It is not the primitive man, who has used his bodydaily for practical purposes, who fears the deterioration of age, but the modern man, who has never had a practical use for hisbody beyond walking from his car to his house. It is the man whose need for the power process has been satisfied during hislife who is best prepared to accept the end of that life.
In response to the arguments of this section someone will say, “Society must find a way to give people the opportunity togo through the power process.” For such people the value of the opportunity is destroyed by the very fact that society gives it tothem. What they need is to find or make their own opportunities. As long as the system GIVES them their opportunities it stillhas them on a leash. To attain autonomy they must get off that leash.
Not everyone in industrial-technological society suffers from psychological problems. Some people even profess to bequite satisfied with society as it is. We now discuss some of the reasons why people differ so greatly in their response tomodern society.
First, there doubtless are differences in the strength of the drive for power. Individuals with a weak drive for power mayhave relatively little need to go through the power process, or at least relatively little need for autonomy in the power process.These are docile types who would have been happy as plantation darkies in the Old South. (We don’t mean to sneer at the“plantation darkies” of the Old South. To their credit, most of the slaves were NOT content with their servitude. We do sneer atpeople who ARE content with servitude.)
Some people may have some exceptional drive, in pursuing which they satisfy their need for the power process. Forexample, those who have an unusually strong drive for social status may spend their whole lives climbing the status ladderwithout ever getting bored with that game.
People vary in their susceptibility to advertising and marketing techniques. Some are so susceptible that, even if they makea great deal of money, they cannot satisfy their constant craving for the shiny new toys that the marketing industry danglesbefore their eyes. So they always feel hard-pressed financially even if their income is large, and their cravings are frustrated.
Some people have low susceptibility to advertising and marketing techniques. These are the people who aren’t interested inmoney. Material acquisition does not serve their need for the power process.
People who have medium susceptibility to advertising and marketing techniques are able to earn enough money to satisfytheir craving for goods and services, but only at the cost of serious effort (putting in overtime, taking a second job, earningpromotions, etc.). Thus material acquisition serves their need for the power process. But it does not necessarily follow that theirneed is fully satisfied. They may have insufficient autonomy in the power process (their work may consist of following orders)and some of their drives may be frustrated (e.g., security, aggression). (We are guilty of oversimplification in paragraphs 
82because we have assumed that the desire for material acquisition is entirely a creation of the advertising and marketingindustry. Of course it’s not that simple. [11]
Some people partly satisfy their need for power by identifying themselves with a powerful organization or mass movement.An individual lacking goals or power joins a movement or an organization, adopts its goals as his own, then works towardthose goals. When some of the goals are attained, the individual, even though his personal efforts have played only aninsignificant part in the attainment of the goals, feels (through his identification with the movement or organization) as if hehad gone through the power process. This phenomenon was exploited by the fascists, nazis and communists. Our society uses ittoo, though less crudely. Example: Manuel Noriega was an irritant to the U.S. (goal: punish Noriega). The U.S. invadedPanama (effort) and punished Noriega (attainment of goal). Thus the U.S. went through the power process and manyAmericans, because of their identification with the U.S., experienced the power process vicariously. Hence the widespreadpublic approval of the Panama invasion; it gave people a sense of power. [
We see the same phenomenon in armies,corporations, political parties, humanitarian organizations, religious or ideological movements. In particular, leftist movementstend to attract people who are seeking to satisfy their need for power. But for most people identification with a largeorganization or a mass movement does not fully satisfy the need for power.
Another way in which people satisfy their need for the power process is through surrogate activities. As we explained inparagraphs 38-
a surrogate activity is an activity that is directed toward an artificial goal that the individual pursues for thesake of the “fulfillment” that he gets from pursuing the goal, not because he needs to attain the goal itself. For instance, there isno practical motive for building enormous muscles, hitting a little ball into a hole or acquiring a complete series of postagestamps. Yet many people in our society devote themselves with passion to bodybuilding, golf or stamp-collecting. Some peopleare more “other-directed” than others, and therefore will more readily attach importance to a surrogate activity simply becausethe people around them treat it as important or because society tells them it is important. That is why some people get veryserious about essentially trivial activities such as sports, or bridge, or chess, or arcane scholarly pursuits, whereas others whoare more clear-sighted never see these things as anything but the surrogate activities that they are, and consequently neverattach enough importance to them to satisfy their need for the power process in that way. It only remains to point out that inmany cases a person’s way of earning a living is also a surrogate activity. Not a PURE surrogate activity, since part of themotive for the activity is to gain the physical necessities and (for some people) social status and the luxuries that advertisingmakes them want. But many people put into their work far more effort than is necessary to earn whatever money and statusthey require, and this extra effort constitutes a surrogate activity. This extra effort, together with the emotional investment thataccompanies it, is one of the most potent forces acting toward the continual development and perfecting of the system, withnegative consequences for individual freedom (see paragraph 131). Especially, for the most creative scientists and engineers,work tends to be largely a surrogate activity. This point is so important that it deserves a separate discussion, which we shallgive in a moment (paragraphs 87-92).
In this section we have explained how many people in modern society do satisfy their need for the power process to agreater or lesser extent. But we think that for the majority of people the need for the power process is not fully satisfied. In thefirst place, those who have an insatiable drive for status, or who get firmly “hooked” on a surrogate activity, or who identifystrongly enough with a movement or organization to satisfy their need for power in that way, are exceptional personalities.Others are not fully satisfied with surrogate activities or by identification with an organization (see paragraphs 
64). In thesecond place, too much control is imposed by the system through explicit regulation or through socialization, which results in adeficiency of autonomy, and in frustration due to the impossibility of attaining certain goals and the necessity of restraining toomany impulses.
But even if most people in industrial-technological society were well satisfied, we (FC) would still be opposed to that formof society, because (among other reasons) we consider it demeaning to fulfill one’s need for the power process throughsurrogate activities or through identification with an organization, rather than through pursuit of real goals.
Science and technology provide the most important examples of surrogate activities. Some scientists claim that they aremotivated by “curiosity” or by a desire to “benefit humanity.” But it is easy to see that neither of these can be the principalmotive of most scientists. As for “curiosity,” that notion is simply absurd. Most scientists work on highly specialized problemsthat are not the object of any normal curiosity. For example, is an astronomer, a mathematician or an entomologist curiousabout the properties of isopropyltrimethylmethane? Of course not. Only a chemist is curious about such a thing, and he iscurious about it only because chemistry is his surrogate activity. Is the chemist curious about the appropriate classification of anew species of beetle? No. That question is of interest only to the entomologist, and he is interested in it only becauseentomology is his surrogate activity. If the chemist and the entomologist had to exert themselves seriously to obtain thephysical necessities, and if that effort exercised their abilities in an interesting way but in some nonscientific pursuit, then theywouldn’t give a damn about isopropyltrimethylmethane or the classification of beetles. Suppose that lack of funds forpostgraduate education had led the chemist to become an insurance broker instead of a chemist. In that case he would havebeen very interested in insurance matters but would have cared nothing about isopropyltrimethylmethane. In any case it is notnormal to put into the satisfaction of mere curiosity the amount of time and effort that scientists put into their work. The“curiosity” explanation for the scientists’ motive just doesn’t stand up.
The “benefit of humanity” explanation doesn’t work any better. Some scientific work has no conceivable relation to thewelfare of the human race most of archaeology or comparative linguistics for example. Some other areas of science presentobviously dangerous possibilities. Yet scientists in these areas are just as enthusiastic about their work as those who developvaccines or study air pollution. Consider the case of Dr. Edward Teller, who had an obvious emotional involvement inpromoting nuclear power plants. Did this involvement stem from a desire to benefit humanity? If so, then why didn’t Dr. Tellerget emotional about other “humanitarian” causes? If he was such a humanitarian then why did he help to develop the H-bomb?As with many other scientific achievements, it is very much open to question whether nuclear power plants actually do benefithumanity. Does the cheap electricity outweigh the accumulating waste and the risk of accidents? Dr. Teller saw only one sideof the question. Clearly his emotional involvement with nuclear power arose not from a desire to “benefit humanity” but from apersonal fulfillment he got from his work and from seeing it put to practical use.
The same is true of scientists generally. With possible rare exceptions, their motive is neither curiosity nor a desire tobenefit humanity but the need to go through the power process: to have a goal (a scientific problem to solve), to make an effort(research) and to attain the goal (solution of the problem.) Science is a surrogate activity because scientists work mainly for thefulfillment they get out of the work itself.
Of course, it’s not that simple. Other motives do play a role for many scientists. Money and status for example. Somescientists may be persons of the type who have an insatiable drive for status (see paragraph 
and this may provide much ofthe motivation for their work. No doubt the majority of scientists, like the majority of the general population, are more or lesssusceptible to advertising and marketing techniques and need money to satisfy their craving for goods and services. Thusscience is not a PURE surrogate activity. But it is in large part a surrogate activity.
Also, science and technology constitute a power mass movement, and many scientists gratify their need for power throughidentification with this mass movement (see paragraph 83).
Thus science marches on blindly, without regard to the real welfare of the human race or to any other standard, obedientonly to the psychological needs of the scientists and of the government officials and corporation executives who provide thefunds for research.
We are going to argue that industrial-technological society cannot be reformed in such a way as to prevent it fromprogressively narrowing the sphere of human freedom. But, because “freedom” is a word that can be interpreted in many ways,we must first make clear what kind of freedom we are concerned with.
By “freedom” we mean the opportunity to go through the power process, with real goals not the artificial goals of surrogateactivities, and without interference, manipulation or supervision from anyone, especially from any large organization. Freedommeans being in control (either as an individual or as a member of a SMALL group) of the life-and-death issues of one’sexistence; food, clothing, shelter and defense against whatever threats there may be in one’s environment. Freedom meanshaving power; not the power to control other people but the power to control the circumstances of one’s own life. One does nothave freedom if anyone else (especially a large organization) has power over one, no matter how benevolently, tolerantly andpermissively that power may be exercised. It is important not to confuse freedom with mere permissiveness (see paragraph 72).
It is said that we live in a free society because we have a certain number of constitutionally guaranteed rights. But these arenot as important as they seem. The degree of personal freedom that exists in a society is determined more by the economic andtechnological structure of the society than by its laws or its form of government. [
Most of the Indian nations of NewEngland were monarchies, and many of the cities of the Italian Renaissance were controlled by dictators. But in reading aboutthese societies one gets the impression that they allowed far more personal freedom than our society does. In part this wasbecause they lacked efficient mechanisms for enforcing the ruler’s will: There were no modern, well-organized police forces,no rapid long-distance communications, no surveillance cameras, no dossiers of information about the lives of average citizens.Hence it was relatively easy to evade control.
As for our constitutional rights, consider for example that of freedom of the press. We certainly don’t mean to knock thatright; it is very important tool for limiting concentration of political power and for keeping those who do have political powerin line by publicly exposing any misbehavior on their part. But freedom of the press is of very little use to the average citizenas an individual. The mass media are mostly under the control of large organizations that are integrated into the system.Anyone who has a little money can have something printed, or can distribute it on the Internet or in some such way, but whathe has to say will be swamped by the vast volume of material put out by the media, hence it will have no practical effect. Tomake an impression on society with words is therefore almost impossible for most individuals and small groups. Take us (FC)for example. If we had never done anything violent and had submitted the present writings to a publisher, they probably wouldnot have been accepted. If they had been accepted and published, they probably would not have attracted many readers,because it’s more fun to watch the entertainment put out by the media than to read a sober essay. Even if these writings had hadmany readers, most of these readers would soon have forgotten what they had read as their minds were flooded by the mass ofmaterial to which the media expose them. In order to get our message before the public with some chance of making a lastingimpression, we’ve had to kill people.
Constitutional rights are useful up to a point, but they do not serve to guarantee much more than what might be called thebourgeois conception of freedom. According to the bourgeois conception, a “free” man is essentially an element of a socialmachine and has only a certain set of prescribed and delimited freedoms; freedoms that are designed to serve the needs of thesocial machine more than those of the individual. Thus the bourgeois’s “free” man has economic freedom because thatpromotes growth and progress; he has freedom of the press because public criticism restrains misbehavior by political leaders;he has a right to a fair trial because imprisonment at the whim of the powerful would be bad for the system. This was clearlythe attitude of Simon Bolivar. To him, people deserved liberty only if they used it to promote progress (progress as conceivedby the bourgeois). Other bourgeois thinkers have taken a similar view of freedom as a mere means to collective ends. ChesterC. Tan, “Chinese Political Thought in the Twentieth Century,” page 
explains the philosophy of the Kuomintang leader HuHan-min: “An individual is granted rights because he is a member of society and his community life requires such rights. Bycommunity Hu meant the whole society of the nation.” And on page 
Tan states that according to Carsum Chang (ChangChun-mai, head of the State Socialist Party in China) freedom had to be used in the interest of the state and of the people as awhole. But what kind of freedom does one have if one can use it only as someone else prescribes? FC’s conception of freedomis not that of Bolivar, Hu, Chang or other bourgeois theorists. The trouble with such theorists is that they have made thedevelopment and application of social theories their surrogate activity. Consequently the theories are designed to serve theneeds of the theorists more than the needs of any people who may be unlucky enough to live in a society on which the theoriesare imposed.
One more point to be made in this section: It should not be assumed that a person has enough freedom just because heSAYS he has enough. Freedom is restricted in part by psychological controls of which people are unconscious, and moreovermany people’s ideas of what constitutes freedom are governed more by social convention than by their real needs. Forexample, it’s likely that many leftists of the oversocialized type would say that most people, including themselves, aresocialized too little rather than too much, yet the oversocialized leftist pays a heavy psychological price for his high level ofsocialization.
Think of history as being the sum of two components: an erratic component that consists of unpredictable events thatfollow no discernible pattern, and a regular component that consists of long-term historical trends. Here we are concerned withthe long-term trends.
FIRST PRINCIPLE. If a SMALL change is made that affects a long-term historical trend, then the effect of that changewill almost always be transitory -- the trend will soon revert to its original state. (Example: A reform movement designed toclean up political corruption in a society rarely has more than a short-term effect; sooner or later the reformers relax andcorruption creeps back in. The level of political corruption in a given society tends to remain constant, or to change only slowlywith the evolution of the society. Normally, a political cleanup will be permanent only if accompanied by widespread socialchanges; a SMALL change in the society won’t be enough.) If a small change in a long-term historical trend appears to bepermanent, it is only because the change acts in the direction in which the trend is already moving, so that the trend is notaltered by only pushed a step ahead.
The first principle is almost a tautology. If a trend were not stable with respect to small changes, it would wander atrandom rather than following a definite direction; in other words it would not be a long-term trend at all.
SECOND PRINCIPLE. If a change is made that is sufficiently large to alter permanently a long-term historical trend, thenit will alter the society as a whole. In other words, a society is a system in which all parts are interrelated, and you can’tpermanently change any important part without changing all other parts as well.
THIRD PRINCIPLE. If a change is made that is large enough to alter permanently a long-term trend, then theconsequences for the society as a whole cannot be predicted in advance. (Unless various other societies have passed throughthe same change and have all experienced the same consequences, in which case one can predict on empirical grounds thatanother society that passes through the same change will be like to experience similar consequences.)
FOURTH PRINCIPLE. A new kind of society cannot be designed on paper. That is, you cannot plan out a new form ofsociety in advance, then set it up and expect it to function as it was designed to do.
The third and fourth principles result from the complexity of human societies. A change in human behavior will affect theeconomy of a society and its physical environment; the economy will affect the environment and vice versa, and the changes inthe economy and the environment will affect human behavior in complex, unpredictable ways; and so forth. The network ofcauses and effects is far too complex to be untangled and understood.
FIFTH PRINCIPLE. People do not consciously and rationally choose the form of their society. Societies develop throughprocesses of social evolution that are not under rational human control.
The fifth principle is a consequence of the other four.
To illustrate: By the first principle, generally speaking an attempt at social reform either acts in the direction in which thesociety is developing anyway (so that it merely accelerates a change that would have occurred in any case) or else it has only atransitory effect, so that the society soon slips back into its old groove. To make a lasting change in the direction ofdevelopment of any important aspect of a society, reform is insufficient and revolution is required. (A revolution does notnecessarily involve an armed uprising or the overthrow of a government.) By the second principle, a revolution never changesonly one aspect of a society, it changes the whole society; and by the third principle changes occur that were never expected ordesired by the revolutionaries. By the fourth principle, when revolutionaries or utopians set up a new kind of society, it neverworks out as planned.
The American Revolution does not provide a counterexample. The American “Revolution” was not a revolution in oursense of the word, but a war of independence followed by a rather far-reaching political reform. The Founding Fathers did notchange the direction of development of American society, nor did they aspire to do so. They only freed the development ofAmerican society from the retarding effect of British rule. Their political reform did not change any basic trend, but onlypushed American political culture along its natural direction of development. British society, of which American society wasan offshoot, had been moving for a long time in the direction of representative democracy. And prior to the War ofIndependence the Americans were already practicing a significant degree of representative democracy in the colonialassemblies. The political system established by the Constitution was modeled on the British system and on the colonialassemblies. With major alteration, to be sure -- there is no doubt that the Founding Fathers took a very important step. But itwas a step along the road that English-speaking world was already traveling. The proof is that Britain and all of its coloniesthat were populated predominantly by people of British descent ended up with systems of representative democracy essentiallysimilar to that of the United States. If the Founding Fathers had lost their nerve and declined to sign the Declaration ofIndependence, our way of life today would not have been significantly different. Maybe we would have had somewhat closerties to Britain, and would have had a Parliament and Prime Minister instead of a Congress and President. No big deal. Thus theAmerican Revolution provides not a counterexample to our principles but a good illustration of them.
Still, one has to use common sense in applying the principles. They are expressed in imprecise language that allowslatitude for interpretation, and exceptions to them can be found. So we present these principles not as inviolable laws but asrules of thumb, or guides to thinking, that may provide a partial antidote to naive ideas about the future of society. Theprinciples should be borne constantly in mind, and whenever one reaches a conclusion that conflicts with them one shouldcarefully reexamine one’s thinking and retain the conclusion only if one has good, solid reasons for doing so.
The foregoing principles help to show how hopelessly difficult it would be to reform the industrial system in such a wayas to prevent it from progressively narrowing our sphere of freedom. There has been a consistent tendency, going back at leastto the Industrial Revolution for technology to strengthen the system at a high cost in individual freedom and local autonomy.Hence any change designed to protect freedom from technology would be contrary to a fundamental trend in the developmentof our society. Consequently, such a change either would be a transitory one -- soon swamped by the tide of history -- or, iflarge enough to be permanent would alter the nature of our whole society. This by the first and second principles. Moreover,since society would be altered in a way that could not be predicted in advance (third principle) there would be great risk.Changes large enough to make a lasting difference in favor of freedom would not be initiated because it would be realized thatthey would gravely disrupt the system. So any attempts at reform would be too timid to be effective. Even if changes largeenough to make a lasting difference were initiated, they would be retracted when their disruptive effects became apparent.Thus, permanent changes in favor of freedom could be brought about only by persons prepared to accept radical, dangerousand unpredictable alteration of the entire system. In other words by revolutionaries, not reformers.
People anxious to rescue freedom without sacrificing the supposed benefits of technology will suggest naive schemes forsome new form of society that would reconcile freedom with technology. Apart from the fact that people who make suchsuggestions seldom propose any practical means by which the new form of society could be set up in the first place, it followsfrom the fourth principle that even if the new form of society could be once established, it either would collapse or would giveresults very different from those expected.
So even on very general grounds it seems highly improbable that any way of changing society could be found that wouldreconcile freedom with modern technology. In the next few sections we will give more specific reasons for concluding thatfreedom and technological progress are incompatible.
As explained in paragraphs 65-
70-
modern man is strapped down by a network of rules and regulations, and hisfate depends on the actions of persons remote from him whose decisions he cannot influence. This is not accidental or a resultof the arbitrariness of arrogant bureaucrats. It is necessary and inevitable in any technologically advanced society. The systemHAS TO regulate human behavior closely in order to function. At work people have to do what they are told to do, otherwiseproduction would be thrown into chaos. Bureaucracies HAVE TO be run according to rigid rules. To allow any substantialpersonal discretion to lower-level bureaucrats would disrupt the system and lead to charges of unfairness due to differences inthe way individual bureaucrats exercised their discretion. It is true that some restrictions on our freedom could be eliminated,but GENERALLY SPEAKING the regulation of our lives by large organizations is necessary for the functioning of industrial-technological society. The result is a sense of powerlessness on the part of the average person. It may be, however, that formalregulations will tend increasingly to be replaced by psychological tools that make us want to do what the system requires of us.(Propaganda [14], educational techniques, “mental health” programs, etc.)
The system HAS TO force people to behave in ways that are increasingly remote from the natural pattern of humanbehavior. For example, the system needs scientists, mathematicians and engineers. It can’t function without them. So heavypressure is put on children to excel in these fields. It isn’t natural for an adolescent human being to spend the bulk of his timesitting at a desk absorbed in study. A normal adolescent wants to spend his time in active contact with the real world. Amongprimitive peoples the things that children are trained to do tend to be in reasonable harmony with natural human impulses.Among the American Indians, for example, boys were trained in active outdoor pursuits -- just the sort of thing that boys like.But in our society children are pushed into studying technical subjects, which most do grudgingly.
In any technologically advanced society the individual’s fate MUST depend on decisions that he personally cannotinfluence to any great extent. A technological society cannot be broken down into small, autonomous communities, becauseproduction depends on the cooperation of very large numbers of people. When a decision affects, say, a million people, theneach of the affected individuals has, on the average, only a one-millionth share in making the decision. What usually happensin practice is that decisions are made by public officials or corporation executives, or by technical specialists, but even whenthe public votes on a decision the number of voters ordinarily is too large for the vote of any one individual to be significant.[
Thus most individuals are unable to influence measurably the major decisions that affect their lives. There is noconceivable way to remedy this in a technologically advanced society. The system tries to “solve” this problem by usingpropaganda to make people WANT the decisions that have been made for them, but even if this “solution” were completelysuccessful in making people feel better, it would be demeaning.
Conservatives and some others advocate more “local autonomy.” Local communities once did have autonomy, but suchautonomy becomes less and less possible as local communities become more enmeshed with and dependent on large-scalesystems like public utilities, computer networks, highway systems, the mass communications media, the modern health caresystem. Also operating against autonomy is the fact that technology applied in one location often affects people at otherlocations far way. Thus pesticide or chemical use near a creek may contaminate the water supply hundreds of milesdownstream, and the greenhouse effect affects the whole world.
The system does not and cannot exist to satisfy human needs. Instead, it is human behavior that has to be modified to fitthe needs of the system. This has nothing to do with the political or social ideology that may pretend to guide the technologicalsystem. It is the fault of technology, because the system is guided not by ideology but by technical necessity. [
Of course thesystem does satisfy many human needs, but generally speaking it does this only to the extend that it is to the advantage of thesystem to do it. It is the needs of the system that are paramount, not those of the human being. For example, the systemprovides people with food because the system couldn’t function if everyone starved; it attends to people’s psychological needswhenever it can CONVENIENTLY do so, because it couldn’t function if too many people became depressed or rebellious. Butthe system, for good, solid, practical reasons, must exert constant pressure on people to mold their behavior to the needs of thesystem. To much waste accumulating? The government, the media, the educational system, environmentalists, everyoneinundates us with a mass of propaganda about recycling. Need more technical personnel? A chorus of voices exhorts kids tostudy science. No one stops to ask whether it is inhumane to force adolescents to spend the bulk of their time studying subjectsmost of them hate. When skilled workers are put out of a job by technical advances and have to undergo “retraining,” no oneasks whether it is humiliating for them to be pushed around in this way. It is simply taken for granted that everyone must bowto technical necessity. and for good reason: If human needs were put before technical necessity there would be economicproblems, unemployment, shortages or worse. The concept of “mental health” in our society is defined largely by the extent towhich an individual behaves in accord with the needs of the system and does so without showing signs of stress.
Efforts to make room for a sense of purpose and for autonomy within the system are no better than a joke. For example,one company, instead of having each of its employees assemble only one section of a catalogue, had each assemble a wholecatalogue, and this was supposed to give them a sense of purpose and achievement. Some companies have tried to give theiremployees more autonomy in their work, but for practical reasons this usually can be done only to a very limited extent, and inany case employees are never given autonomy as to ultimate goals -- their “autonomous” efforts can never be directed towardgoals that they select personally, but only toward their employer’s goals, such as the survival and growth of the company. Anycompany would soon go out of business if it permitted its employees to act otherwise. Similarly, in any enterprise within asocialist system, workers must direct their efforts toward the goals of the enterprise, otherwise the enterprise will not serve itspurpose as part of the system. Once again, for purely technical reasons it is not possible for most individuals or small groups tohave much autonomy in industrial society. Even the small-business owner commonly has only limited autonomy. Apart fromthe necessity of government regulation, he is restricted by the fact that he must fit into the economic system and conform to itsrequirements. For instance, when someone develops a new technology, the small- business person often has to use thattechnology whether he wants to or not, in order to remain competitive.
A further reason why industrial society cannot be reformed in favor of freedom is that modern technology is a unifiedsystem in which all parts are dependent on one another. You can’t get rid of the “bad” parts of technology and retain only the“good” parts. Take modern medicine, for example. Progress in medical science depends on progress in chemistry, physics,biology, computer science and other fields. Advanced medical treatments require expensive, high-tech equipment that can bemade available only by a technologically progressive, economically rich society. Clearly you can’t have much Progress inmedicine without the whole technological system and everything that goes with it.
Even if medical progress could be maintained without the rest of the technological system, it would by itself bring certainevils. Suppose for example that a cure for diabetes is discovered. People with a genetic tendency to diabetes will then be able tosurvive and reproduce as well as anyone else. Natural selection against genes for diabetes will cease and such genes will spreadthroughout the population. (This may be occurring to some extent already, since diabetes, while not curable, can be controlledthrough use of insulin.) The same thing will happen with many other diseases susceptibility to which is affected by geneticdegradation of the population. The only solution will be some sort of eugenics program or extensive genetic engineering ofhuman beings, so that man in the future will no longer be a creation of nature, or of chance, or of God (depending on yourreligious or philosophical opinions), but a manufactured product.
If you think that big government interferes in your life too much NOW, just wait till the government starts regulating thegenetic constitution of your children. Such regulation will inevitably follow the introduction of genetic engineering of humanbeings, because the consequences of unregulated genetic engineering would be disastrous. [19]
The usual response to such concerns is to talk about “medical ethics.” But a code of ethics would not serve to protectfreedom in the face of medical progress; it would only make matters worse. A code of ethics applicable to genetic engineeringwould be in effect a means of regulating the genetic constitution of human beings. Somebody (probably the upper-middle class,mostly) would decide that such and such applications of genetic engineering were “ethical”. and others were not, so that ineffect they would be imposing their own values on the genetic constitution of the population at large. Even if a code of ethicswere chosen on a completely democratic basis, the majority would be imposing their own values on any minorities who mighthave a different idea of what constituted an “ethical” use of genetic engineering. The only code of ethics that would trulyprotect freedom would be one that prohibited ANY genetic engineering of human beings, and you can be sure that no suchcode will ever be applied in a technological society. No code that reduced genetic engineering to a minor role could stand upfor long, because the temptation presented by the immense power of biotechnology would be irresistible, especially since to themajority of people many of its applications will seem obviously and unequivocally good (eliminating physical and mentaldiseases, giving people the abilities they need to get along in today’s world). Inevitably, genetic engineering will be usedextensively, but only in ways consistent with the needs of the industrial-technological system. [20]
It is not possible to make a LASTING compromise between technology and freedom, because technology is by far themore powerful social force and continually encroaches on freedom through REPEATED compromises. Imagine the case oftwo neighbors, each of whom at the outset owns the same amount of land, but one of whom is more powerful than the other.The powerful one demands a piece of the other’s land. The weak one refuses. The powerful one says, “OK, let’s compromise.Give me half of what I asked.” The weak one has little choice but to give in. Some time later the powerful neighbor demandsanother piece of land, again there is a compromise, and so forth. By forcing a long series of compromises on the weaker man,the powerful one eventually gets all of his land. So it goes in the conflict between technology and freedom.
Let us explain why technology is a more powerful social force than the aspiration for freedom.
A technological advance that appears not to threaten freedom often turns out to threaten it very seriously later on. Forexample, consider motorized transport. A walking man formerly could go where he pleased, go at his own pace withoutobserving any traffic regulations, and was independent of technological support-systems. When motor vehicles wereintroduced they appeared to increase man’s freedom. They took no freedom away from the walking man, no one had to have anautomobile if he didn’t want one, and anyone who did choose to buy an automobile could travel much faster and farther than awalking man. But the introduction of motorized transport soon changed society in such a way as to restrict greatly man’sfreedom of locomotion. When automobiles became numerous, it became necessary to regulate their use extensively. In a car,especially in densely populated areas, one cannot just go where one likes at one’s own pace one’s movement is governed by theflow of traffic and by various traffic laws. One is tied down by various obligations: license requirements, driver test, renewingregistration, insurance, maintenance required for safety, monthly payments on purchase price. Moreover, the use of motorizedtransport is no longer optional. Since the introduction of motorized transport the arrangement of our cities has changed in sucha way that the majority of people no longer live within walking distance of their place of employment, shopping areas andrecreational opportunities, so that they HAVE TO depend on the automobile for transportation. Or else they must use publictransportation, in which case they have even less control over their own movement than when driving a car. Even the walker’sfreedom is now greatly restricted. In the city he continually has to stop to wait for traffic lights that are designed mainly toserve auto traffic. In the country, motor traffic makes it dangerous and unpleasant to walk along the highway. (Note thisimportant point that we have just illustrated with the case of motorized transport: When a new item of technology is introducedas an option that an individual can accept or not as he chooses, it does not necessarily REMAIN optional. In many cases thenew technology changes society in such a way that people eventually find themselves FORCED to use it.)
While technological progress AS A WHOLE continually narrows our sphere of freedom, each new technical advanceCONSIDERED BY ITSELF appears to be desirable. Electricity, indoor plumbing, rapid long-distance communications ... howcould one argue against any of these things, or against any other of the innumerable technical advances that have made modernsociety? It would have been absurd to resist the introduction of the telephone, for example. It offered many advantages and nodisadvantages. Yet, as we explained in paragraphs 59-
all these technical advances taken together have created a world inwhich the average man’s fate is no longer in his own hands or in the hands of his neighbors and friends, but in those ofpoliticians, corporation executives and remote, anonymous technicians and bureaucrats whom he as an individual has no powerto influence. [
The same process will continue in the future. Take genetic engineering, for example. Few people will resistthe introduction of a genetic technique that eliminates a hereditary disease. It does no apparent harm and prevents muchsuffering. Yet a large number of genetic improvements taken together will make the human being into an engineered productrather than a free creation of chance (or of God, or whatever, depending on your religious beliefs).
Another reason why technology is such a powerful social force is that, within the context of a given society, technologicalprogress marches in only one direction; it can never be reversed. Once a technical innovation has been introduced, peopleusually become dependent on it, so that they can never again do without it, unless it is replaced by some still more advancedinnovation. Not only do people become dependent as individuals on a new item of technology, but, even more, the system as awhole becomes dependent on it. (Imagine what would happen to the system today if computers, for example, were eliminated.)Thus the system can move in only one direction, toward greater technologization. Technology repeatedly forces freedom totake a step back, but technology can never take a step back -- short of the overthrow of the whole technological system.
Technology advances with great rapidity and threatens freedom at many different points at the same time (crowding, rulesand regulations, increasing dependence of individuals on large organizations, propaganda and other psychological techniques,genetic engineering, invasion of privacy through surveillance devices and computers, etc.). To hold back any ONE of thethreats to freedom would require a long and difficult social struggle. Those who want to protect freedom are overwhelmed bythe sheer number of new attacks and the rapidity with which they develop, hence they become apathetic and no longer resist.To fight each of the threats separately would be futile. Success can be hoped for only by fighting the technological system as awhole; but that is revolution, not reform.
Technicians (we use this term in its broad sense to describe all those who perform a specialized task that requires training)tend to be so involved in their work (their surrogate activity) that when a conflict arises between their technical work andfreedom, they almost always decide in favor of their technical work. This is obvious in the case of scientists, but it also appearselsewhere: Educators humanitarian groups, conservation organizations do not hesitate to use propaganda or other psychologicaltechniques to help them achieve their laudable ends. Corporations and government agencies, when they find it useful, do nothesitate to collect information about individuals without regard to their privacy. Law enforcement agencies are frequentlyinconvenienced by the constitutional rights of suspects and often of completely innocent persons, and they do whatever theycan do legally (or sometimes illegally) to restrict or circumvent those rights. Most of these educators, government officials andlaw officers believe in freedom, privacy and constitutional rights, but when these conflict with their work, they usually feel thattheir work is more important.
It is well known that people generally work better and more persistently when striving for a reward than when attemptingto avoid a punishment or negative outcome. Scientists and other technicians are motivated mainly by the rewards they getthrough their work. But those who oppose technological invasions of freedom are working to avoid a negative outcome,consequently there are few who work persistently and well at this discouraging task. If reformers ever achieved a signal victorythat seemed to set up a solid barrier against further erosion of freedom through technical progress, most would tend to relax andturn their attention to more agreeable pursuits. But the scientists would remain busy in their laboratories, and technology as itprogresses would find ways, in spite of any barriers, to exert more and more control over individuals and make them alwaysmore dependent on the system.
No social arrangements, whether laws, institutions, customs or ethical codes, can provide permanent protection againsttechnology. History shows that all social arrangements are transitory; they all change or break down eventually. Buttechnological advances are permanent within the context of a given civilization. Suppose for example that it were possible toarrive at some social arrangements that would prevent genetic engineering from being applied to human beings, or prevent itfrom being applied in such a way as to threaten freedom and dignity. Still, the technology would remain waiting. Sooner orlater the social arrangement would break down. Probably sooner, given the pace of change in our society. Then geneticengineering would begin to invade our sphere of freedom. and this invasion would be irreversible (short of a breakdown oftechnological civilization itself). Any illusions about achieving anything permanent through social arrangements should bedispelled by what is currently happening with environmental legislation. A few years ago its seemed that there were securelegal barriers preventing at least SOME of the worst forms of environmental degradation. A change in the political wind, andthose barriers begin to crumble.
For all of the foregoing reasons, technology is a more powerful social force than the aspiration for freedom. But thisstatement requires an important qualification. It appears that during the next several decades the industrial-technologicalsystem will be undergoing severe stresses due to economic and environmental problems, and especially due to problems ofhuman behavior (alienation, rebellion, hostility, a variety of social and psychological difficulties). We hope that the stressesthrough which the system is likely to pass will cause it to break down, or at least will weaken it sufficiently so that a revolutionagainst it becomes possible. If such a revolution occurs and is successful, then at that particular moment the aspiration forfreedom will have proved more powerful than technology.
In paragraph 
we used an analogy of a weak neighbor who is left destitute by a strong neighbor who takes all his landby forcing on him a series of compromises. But suppose now that the strong neighbor gets sick, so that he is unable to defendhimself. The weak neighbor can force the strong one to give him his land back, or he can kill him. If he lets the strong mansurvive and only forces him to give the land back, he is a fool, because when the strong man gets well he will again take all theland for himself. The only sensible alternative for the weaker man is to kill the strong one while he has the chance. In the sameway, while the industrial system is sick we must destroy it. If we compromise with it and let it recover from its sickness, it willeventually wipe out all of our freedom.
If anyone still imagines that it would be possible to reform the system in such a way as to protect freedom fromtechnology, let him consider how clumsily and for the most part unsuccessfully our society has dealt with other social problemsthat are far more simple and straightforward. Among other things, the system has failed to stop environmental degradation,political corruption, drug trafficking or domestic abuse.
Take our environmental problems, for example. Here the conflict of values is straightforward: economic expedience nowversus saving some of our natural resources for our grandchildren. [
But on this subject we get only a lot of blather andobfuscation from the people who have power, and nothing like a clear, consistent line of action, and we keep on piling upenvironmental problems that our grandchildren will have to live with. Attempts to resolve the environmental issue consist ofstruggles and compromises between different factions, some of which are ascendant at one moment, others at another moment.The line of struggle changes with the shifting currents of public opinion. This is not a rational process, nor is it one that islikely to lead to a timely and successful solution to the problem. Major social problems, if they get “solved” at all, are rarely ornever solved through any rational, comprehensive plan. They just work themselves out through a process in which variouscompeting groups pursuing their own (usually short-term) self-interest [
arrive (mainly by luck) at some more or less stablemodus vivendi. In fact, the principles we formulated in paragraphs 100-
make it seem doubtful that rational long-termsocial planning can EVER be successful.
Thus it is clear that the human race has at best a very limited capacity for solving even relatively straightforward socialproblems. How then is it going to solve the far more difficult and subtle problem of reconciling freedom with technology?Technology presents clear-cut material advantages, whereas freedom is an abstraction that means different things to differentpeople. and its loss is easily obscured by propaganda and fancy talk.
And note this important difference: It is conceivable that our environmental problems (for example) may some day besettled through a rational, comprehensive plan, but if this happens it will be only because it is in the long-term interest of thesystem to solve these problems. But it is NOT in the interest of the system to preserve freedom or small-group autonomy. Onthe contrary, it is in the interest of the system to bring human behavior under control to the greatest possible extent. [
Thus,while practical considerations may eventually force the system to take a rational, prudent approach to environmental problems,equally practical considerations will force the system to regulate human behavior ever more closely (preferably by indirectmeans that will disguise the encroachment on freedom). This isn’t just our opinion. Eminent social scientists (e.g. James Q.Wilson) have stressed the importance of “socializing” people more effectively.
We hope we have convinced the reader that the system cannot be reformed in such a way as to reconcile freedom withtechnology. The only way out is to dispense with the industrial-technological system altogether. This implies revolution, notnecessarily an armed uprising, but certainly a radical and fundamental change in the nature of society. 
People tend toassume that because a revolution involves a much greater change than reform does, it is more difficult to bring about thanreform is. Actually, under certain circumstances revolution is much easier than reform. The reason is that a revolutionarymovement can inspire an intensity of commitment that a reform movement cannot inspire. A reform movement merely offersto solve a particular social problem. A revolutionary movement offers to solve all problems at one stroke and create a wholenew world; it provides the kind of ideal for which people will take great risks and make great sacrifices. For this reasons itwould be much easier to overthrow the whole technological system than to put effective, permanent restraints on thedevelopment or application of any one segment of technology, such as genetic engineering, for example. Not many people willdevote themselves with single-minded passion to imposing and maintaining restraints on genetic engineering, but undersuitable conditions large numbers of people may devote themselves passionately to a revolution against the industrial-technological system. As we noted in paragraph 
reformers seeking to limit certain aspects of technology would beworking to avoid a negative outcome. But revolutionaries work to gain a powerful reward -- fulfillment of their revolutionaryvision and therefore work harder and more persistently than reformers do.
Reform is always restrained by the fear of painful consequences if changes go too far. But once a revolutionary fever hastaken hold of a society, people are willing to undergo unlimited hardships for the sake of their revolution. This was clearlyshown in the French and Russian Revolutions. It may be that in such cases only a minority of the population is reallycommitted to the revolution, but this minority is sufficiently large and active so that it becomes the dominant force in society.We will have more to say about revolution in paragraphs 180-205.
Since the beginning of civilization, organized societies have had to put pressures on human beings of the sake of thefunctioning of the social organism. The kinds of pressures vary greatly from one society to another. Some of the pressures arephysical (poor diet, excessive labor, environmental pollution), some are psychological (noise, crowding, forcing humanbehavior into the mold that society requires). In the past, human nature has been approximately constant, or at any rate hasvaried only within certain bounds. Consequently, societies have been able to push people only up to certain limits. When thelimit of human endurance has been passed, things start going wrong: rebellion, or crime, or corruption, or evasion of work, ordepression and other mental problems, or an elevated death rate, or a declining birth rate or something else, so that either thesociety breaks down, or its functioning becomes too inefficient and it is (quickly or gradually, through conquest, attrition orevolution) replaced by some more efficient form of society. [25]
Thus human nature has in the past put certain limits on the development of societies. People could be pushed only so farand no farther. But today this may be changing, because modern technology is developing ways of modifying human beings.
Imagine a society that subjects people to conditions that make them terribly unhappy, then gives them drugs to take awaytheir unhappiness. Science fiction? It is already happening to some extent in our own society. It is well known that the rate ofclinical depression has been greatly increasing in recent decades. We believe that this is due to disruption of the power process,as explained in paragraphs 59-
But even if we are wrong, the increasing rate of depression is certainly the result of SOMEconditions that exist in today’s society. Instead of removing the conditions that make people depressed, modern society givesthem antidepressant drugs. In effect, antidepressants are a means of modifying an individual’s internal state in such a way as toenable him to tolerate social conditions that he would otherwise find intolerable. (Yes, we know that depression is often ofpurely genetic origin. We are referring here to those cases in which environment plays the predominant role.)
Drugs that affect the mind are only one example of the new methods of controlling human behavior that modern society isdeveloping. Let us look at some of the other methods.
To start with, there are the techniques of surveillance. Hidden video cameras are now used in most stores and in manyother places, computers are used to collect and process vast amounts of information about individuals. Information so obtainedgreatly increases the effectiveness of physical coercion (i.e., law enforcement). [
Then there are the methods of propaganda,for which the mass communication media provide effective vehicles. Efficient techniques have been developed for winningelections, selling products, influencing public opinion. The entertainment industry serves as an important psychological tool ofthe system, possibly even when it is dishing out large amounts of sex and violence. Entertainment provides modern man withan essential means of escape. While absorbed in television, videos, etc., he can forget stress, anxiety, frustration,dissatisfaction. Many primitive peoples, when they don’t have work to do, are quite content to sit for hours at a time doingnothing at all, because they are at peace with themselves and their world. But most modern people must be constantly occupiedor entertained, otherwise they get “bored,” i.e., they get fidgety, uneasy, irritable.
Other techniques strike deeper than the foregoing. Education is no longer a simple affair of paddling a kid’s behind whenhe doesn’t know his lessons and patting him on the head when he does know them. It is becoming a scientific technique forcontrolling the child’s development. Sylvan Learning Centers, for example, have had great success in motivating children tostudy, and psychological techniques are also used with more or less success in many conventional schools. “Parenting”techniques that are taught to parents are designed to make children accept fundamental values of the system and behave inways that the system finds desirable. “Mental health” programs, “intervention” techniques, psychotherapy and so forth areostensibly designed to benefit individuals, but in practice they usually serve as methods for inducing individuals to think andbehave as the system requires. (There is no contradiction here; an individual whose attitudes or behavior bring him into conflictwith the system is up against a force that is too powerful for him to conquer or escape from, hence he is likely to suffer fromstress, frustration, defeat. His path will be much easier if he thinks and behaves as the system requires. In that sense the systemis acting for the benefit of the individual when it brainwashes him into conformity.) Child abuse in its gross and obvious formsis disapproved in most if not all cultures. Tormenting a child for a trivial reason or no reason at all is something that appallsalmost everyone. But many psychologists interpret the concept of abuse much more broadly. Is spanking, when used as part ofa rational and consistent system of discipline, a form of abuse? The question will ultimately be decided by whether or notspanking tends to produce behavior that makes a person fit in well with the existing system of society. In practice, the word“abuse” tends to be interpreted to include any method of child-rearing that produces behavior inconvenient for the system.Thus, when they go beyond the prevention of obvious, senseless cruelty, programs for preventing “child abuse” are directedtoward the control of human behavior on behalf of the system.
Presumably, research will continue to increase the effectiveness of psychological techniques for controlling humanbehavior. But we think it is unlikely that psychological techniques alone will be sufficient to adjust human beings to the kind ofsociety that technology is creating. Biological methods probably will have to be used. We have already mentioned the use ofdrugs in this connection. Neurology may provide other avenues for modifying the human mind. Genetic engineering of humanbeings is already beginning to occur in the form of “gene therapy,” and there is no reason to assume that such methods will noteventually be used to modify those aspects of the body that affect mental functioning.
As we mentioned in paragraph 
industrial society seems likely to be entering a period of severe stress, due in part toproblems of human behavior and in part to economic and environmental problems. And a considerable proportion of thesystem’s economic and environmental problems result from the way human beings behave. Alienation, low self-esteem,depression, hostility, rebellion; children who won’t study, youth gangs, illegal drug use, rape, child abuse, other crimes, unsafesex, teen pregnancy, population growth, political corruption, race hatred, ethnic rivalry, bitter ideological conflict (e.g., pro-choice vs. pro-life), political extremism, terrorism, sabotage, anti-government groups, hate groups. All these threaten the verysurvival of the system. The system will therefore be FORCED to use every practical means of controlling human behavior.
The social disruption that we see today is certainly not the result of mere chance. It can only be a result of the conditionsof life that the system imposes on people. (We have argued that the most important of these conditions is disruption of thepower process.) If the systems succeeds in imposing sufficient control over human behavior to assure its own survival, a newwatershed in human history will have been passed. Whereas formerly the limits of human endurance have imposed limits onthe development of societies (as we explained in Paragraphs 
144), industrial-technological society will be able to passthose limits by modifying human beings, whether by psychological methods or biological methods or both. In the future, socialsystems will not be adjusted to suit the needs of human beings. Instead, human being will be adjusted to suit the needs of thesystem. [27]
generally speaking, technological control over human behavior will probably not be introduced with a totalitarianintention or even through a conscious desire to restrict human freedom. [
Each new step in the assertion of control over thehuman mind will be taken as a rational response to a problem that faces society, such as curing alcoholism, reducing the crimerate or inducing young people to study science and engineering. In many cases there will be a humanitarian justification. Forexample, when a psychiatrist prescribes an anti-depressant for a depressed patient, he is clearly doing that individual a favor. Itwould be inhumane to withhold the drug from someone who needs it. When Parents send their children to Sylvan LearningCenters to have them manipulated into becoming enthusiastic about their studies, they do so from concern for their children’swelfare. It may be that some of these parents wish that one didn’t have to have specialized training to get a job and that theirkid didn’t have to be brainwashed into becoming a computer nerd. But what can they do? They can’t change society, and theirchild may be unemployable if he doesn’t have certain skills. So they send him to Sylvan.
Thus control over human behavior will be introduced not by a calculated decision of the authorities but through a processof social evolution (RAPID evolution, however). The process will be impossible to resist, because each advance, considered byitself, will appear to be beneficial, or at least the evil involved in making the advance will appear to be beneficial, or at least theevil involved in making the advance will seem to be less than that which would result from not making it (see paragraph 127).Propaganda for example is used for many good purposes, such as discouraging child abuse or race hatred. [
Sex education isobviously useful, yet the effect of sex education (to the extent that it is successful) is to take the shaping of sexual attitudesaway from the family and put it into the hands of the state as represented by the public school system.
Suppose a biological trait is discovered that increases the likelihood that a child will grow up to be a criminal, and supposesome sort of gene therapy can remove this trait. [
Of course most parents whose children possess the trait will have themundergo the therapy. It would be inhumane to do otherwise, since the child would probably have a miserable life if he grew upto be a criminal. But many or most primitive societies have a low crime rate in comparison with that of our society, eventhough they have neither high-tech methods of child-rearing nor harsh systems of punishment. Since there is no reason tosuppose that more modern men than primitive men have innate predatory tendencies, the high crime rate of our society must bedue to the pressures that modern conditions put on people, to which many cannot or will not adjust. Thus a treatment designedto remove potential criminal tendencies is at least in part a way of re-engineering people so that they suit the requirements ofthe system.
Our society tends to regard as a “sickness” any mode of thought or behavior that is inconvenient for the system, and this isplausible because when an individual doesn’t fit into the system it causes pain to the individual as well as problems for thesystem. Thus the manipulation of an individual to adjust him to the system is seen as a “cure” for a “sickness” and therefore asgood.
In paragraph 
we pointed out that if the use of a new item of technology is INITIALLY optional, it does notnecessarily REMAIN optional, because the new technology tends to change society in such a way that it becomes difficult orimpossible for an individual to function without using that technology. This applies also to the technology of human behavior.In a world in which most children are put through a program to make them enthusiastic about studying, a parent will almost beforced to put his kid through such a program, because if he does not, then the kid will grow up to be, comparatively speaking,an ignoramus and therefore unemployable. Or suppose a biological treatment is discovered that, without undesirable side-effects, will greatly reduce the psychological stress from which so many people suffer in our society. If large numbers ofpeople choose to undergo the treatment, then the general level of stress in society will be reduced, so that it will be possible forthe system to increase the stress-producing pressures. In fact, something like this seems to have happened already with one ofour society’s most important psychological tools for enabling people to reduce (or at least temporarily escape from) stress,namely, mass entertainment (see paragraph 147). Our use of mass entertainment is “optional”: No law requires us to watchtelevision, listen to the radio, read magazines. Yet mass entertainment is a means of escape and stress-reduction on which mostof us have become dependent. Everyone complains about the trashiness of television, but almost everyone watches it. A fewhave kicked the TV habit, but it would be a rare person who could get along today without using ANY form of massentertainment. (Yet until quite recently in human history most people got along very nicely with no other entertainment thanthat which each local community created for itself.) Without the entertainment industry the system probably would not havebeen able to get away with putting as much stress-producing pressure on us as it does.
Assuming that industrial society survives, it is likely that technology will eventually acquire something approachingcomplete control over human behavior. It has been established beyond any rational doubt that human thought and behaviorhave a largely biological basis. As experimenters have demonstrated, feelings such as hunger, pleasure, anger and fear can beturned on and off by electrical stimulation of appropriate parts of the brain. Memories can be destroyed by damaging parts ofthe brain or they can be brought to the surface by electrical stimulation. Hallucinations can be induced or moods changed bydrugs. There may or may not be an immaterial human soul, but if there is one it clearly is less powerful that the biologicalmechanisms of human behavior. For if that were not the case then researchers would not be able so easily to manipulate humanfeelings and behavior with drugs and electrical currents.
It presumably would be impractical for all people to have electrodes inserted in their heads so that they could becontrolled by the authorities. But the fact that human thoughts and feelings are so open to biological intervention shows that theproblem of controlling human behavior is mainly a technical problem; a problem of neurons, hormones and complexmolecules; the kind of problem that is accessible to scientific attack. Given the outstanding record of our society in solvingtechnical problems, it is overwhelmingly probable that great advances will be made in the control of human behavior.
Will public resistance prevent the introduction of technological control of human behavior? It certainly would if anattempt were made to introduce such control all at once. But since technological control will be introduced through a longsequence of small advances, there will be no rational and effective public resistance. (See paragraphs 

153.)
To those who think that all this sounds like science fiction, we point out that yesterday’s science fiction is today’s fact.The Industrial Revolution has radically altered man’s environment and way of life, and it is only to be expected that astechnology is increasingly applied to the human body and mind, man himself will be altered as radically as his environmentand way of life have been.
But we have gotten ahead of our story. It is one thing to develop in the laboratory a series of psychological or biologicaltechniques for manipulating human behavior and quite another to integrate these techniques into a functioning social system.The latter problem is the more difficult of the two. For example, while the techniques of educational psychology doubtlesswork quite well in the “lab schools” where they are developed, it is not necessarily easy to apply them effectively throughoutour educational system. We all know what many of our schools are like. The teachers are too busy taking knives and gunsaway from the kids to subject them to the latest techniques for making them into computer nerds. Thus, in spite of all itstechnical advances relating to human behavior, the system to date has not been impressively successful in controlling humanbeings. The people whose behavior is fairly well under the control of the system are those of the type that might be called“bourgeois.” But there are growing numbers of people who in one way or another are rebels against the system: welfareleaches, youth gangs, cultists. Satanists, nazis, radical environmentalists, militiamen, etc.
The system is currently engaged in a desperate struggle to overcome certain problems that threaten its survival, amongwhich the problems of human behavior are the most important. If the system succeeds in acquiring sufficient control overhuman behavior quickly enough, it will probably survive. Otherwise it will break down. We think the issue will most likely beresolved within the next several decades, say 
to 
years.
Suppose the system survives the crisis of the next several decades. By that time it will have to have solved, or at leastbrought under control, the principal problems that confront it, in particular that of “socializing” human beings; that is, makingpeople sufficiently docile so that heir behavior no longer threatens the system. That being accomplished, it does not appear thatthere would be any further obstacle to the development of technology, and it would presumably advance toward its logicalconclusion, which is complete control over everything on Earth, including human beings and all other important organisms.The system may become a unitary, monolithic organization, or it may be more or less fragmented and consist of a number oforganizations coexisting in a relationship that includes elements of both cooperation and competition, just as today thegovernment, the corporations and other large organizations both cooperate and compete with one another. Human freedommostly will have vanished, because individuals and small groups will be impotent vis-a-vis large organizations armed withsuper-technology and an arsenal of advanced psychological and biological tools for manipulating human beings, besidesinstruments of surveillance and physical coercion. Only a small number of people will have any real power, and even theseprobably will have only very limited freedom, because their behavior too will be regulated; just as today our politicians andcorporation executives can retain their positions of power only as long as their behavior remains within certain fairly narrowlimits.
Don’t imagine that the systems will stop developing further techniques for controlling human beings and nature once thecrisis of the next few decades is over and increasing control is no longer necessary for the system’s survival. On the contrary,once the hard times are over the system will increase its control over people and nature more rapidly, because it will no longerbe hampered by difficulties of the kind that it is currently experiencing. Survival is not the principal motive for extendingcontrol. As we explained in paragraphs 87-
technicians and scientists carry on their work largely as a surrogate activity; thatis, they satisfy their need for power by solving technical problems. They will continue to do this with unabated enthusiasm, andamong the most interesting and challenging problems for them to solve will be those of understanding the human body andmind and intervening in their development. For the “good of humanity,” of course.
But suppose on the other hand that the stresses of the coming decades prove to be too much for the system. If the systembreaks down there may be a period of chaos, a “time of troubles” such as those that history has recorded at various epochs inthe past. It is impossible to predict what would emerge from such a time of troubles, but at any rate the human race would begiven a new chance. The greatest danger is that industrial society may begin to reconstitute itself within the first few years afterthe breakdown. Certainly there will be many people (power-hungry types especially) who will be anxious to get the factoriesrunning again.
Therefore two tasks confront those who hate the servitude to which the industrial system is reducing the human race. First,we must work to heighten the social stresses within the system so as to increase the likelihood that it will break down or beweakened sufficiently so that a revolution against it becomes possible. Second, it is necessary to develop and propagate anideology that opposes technology and the industrial society if and when the system becomes sufficiently weakened. And suchan ideology will help to assure that, if and when industrial society breaks down, its remnants will be smashed beyond repair, sothat the system cannot be reconstituted. The factories should be destroyed, technical books burned, etc.
The industrial system will not break down purely as a result of revolutionary action. It will not be vulnerable torevolutionary attack unless its own internal problems of development lead it into very serious difficulties. So if the systembreaks down it will do so either spontaneously, or through a process that is in part spontaneous but helped along byrevolutionaries. If the breakdown is sudden, many people will die, since the world’s population has become so over-grown thatit cannot even feed itself any longer without advanced technology. Even if the breakdown is gradual enough so that reductionof the population can occur more through lowering of the birth rate than through elevation of the death rate, the process of de-industrialization probably will be very chaotic and involve much suffering. It is naive to think it likely that technology can bephased out in a smoothly managed, orderly way, especially since the technophiles will fight stubbornly at every step. Is ittherefore cruel to work for the breakdown of the system? Maybe, but maybe not. In the first place, revolutionaries will not beable to break the system down unless it is already in enough trouble so that there would be a good chance of its eventuallybreaking down by itself anyway; and the bigger the system grows, the more disastrous the consequences of its breakdown willbe; so it may be that revolutionaries, by hastening the onset of the breakdown, will be reducing the extent of the disaster.
In the second place, one has to balance struggle and death against the loss of freedom and dignity. To many of us, freedomand dignity are more important than a long life or avoidance of physical pain. Besides, we all have to die some time, and it maybe better to die fighting for survival, or for a cause, than to live a long but empty and purposeless life.
In the third place, it is not at all certain that survival of the system will lead to less suffering than breakdown of the systemwould. The system has already caused, and is continuing to cause, immense suffering all over the world. Ancient cultures, thatfor hundreds of years gave people a satisfactory relationship with each other and with their environment, have been shatteredby contact with industrial society, and the result has been a whole catalogue of economic, environmental, social andpsychological problems. One of the effects of the intrusion of industrial society has been that over much of the worldtraditional controls on population have been thrown out of balance. Hence the population explosion, with all that that implies.Then there is the psychological suffering that is widespread throughout the supposedly fortunate countries of the West (seeparagraphs 
45). No one knows what will happen as a result of ozone depletion, the greenhouse effect and otherenvironmental problems that cannot yet be foreseen. And, as nuclear proliferation has shown, new technology cannot be keptout of the hands of dictators and irresponsible Third World nations. Would you like to speculate about what Iraq or NorthKorea will do with genetic engineering?
“Oh!” say the technophiles, “Science is going to fix all that! We will conquer famine, eliminate psychological suffering,make everybody healthy and happy!” Yeah, sure. That’s what they said 
years ago. The Industrial Revolution was supposedto eliminate poverty, make everybody happy, etc. The actual result has been quite different. The technophiles are hopelesslynaive (or self-deceiving) in their understanding of social problems. They are unaware of (or choose to ignore) the fact thatwhen large changes, even seemingly beneficial ones, are introduced into a society, they lead to a long sequence of otherchanges, most of which are impossible to predict (paragraph 103). The result is disruption of the society. So it is very probablethat in their attempts to end poverty and disease, engineer docile, happy personalities and so forth, the technophiles will createsocial systems that are terribly troubled, even more so than the present once. For example, the scientists boast that they will endfamine by creating new, genetically engineered food plants. But this will allow the human population to keep expandingindefinitely, and it is well known that crowding leads to increased stress and aggression. This is merely one example of thePREDICTABLE problems that will arise. We emphasize that, as past experience has shown, technical progress will lead toother new problems that CANNOT be predicted in advance (paragraph 103). In fact, ever since the Industrial Revolution,technology has been creating new problems for society far more rapidly than it has been solving old ones. Thus it will take along and difficult period of trial and error for the technophiles to work the bugs out of their Brave New World (if they everydo). In the meantime there will be great suffering. So it is not at all clear that the survival of industrial society would involveless suffering than the breakdown of that society would. Technology has gotten the human race into a fix from which there isnot likely to be any easy escape.
But suppose now that industrial society does survive the next several decades and that the bugs do eventually get workedout of the system, so that it functions smoothly. What kind of system will it be? We will consider several possibilities.
First let us postulate that the computer scientists succeed in developing intelligent machines that can do all things betterthan human beings can do them. In that case presumably all work will be done by vast, highly organized systems of machinesand no human effort will be necessary. Either of two cases might occur. The machines might be permitted to make all of theirown decisions without human oversight, or else human control over the machines might be retained.
If the machines are permitted to make all their own decisions, we can’t make any conjectures as to the results, because it isimpossible to guess how such machines might behave. We only point out that the fate of the human race would be at the mercyof the machines. It might be argued that the human race would never be foolish enough to hand over all power to the machines.But we are suggesting neither that the human race would voluntarily turn power over to the machines nor that the machineswould willfully seize power. What we do suggest is that the human race might easily permit itself to drift into a position ofsuch dependence on the machines that it would have no practical choice but to accept all of the machines’ decisions. As societyand the problems that face it become more and more complex and as machines become more and more intelligent, people willlet machines make more and more of their decisions for them, simply because machine-made decisions will bring better resultsthan man-made ones. Eventually a stage may be reached at which the decisions necessary to keep the system running will be socomplex that human beings will be incapable of making them intelligently. At that stage the machines will be in effectivecontrol. People won’t be able to just turn the machine off, because they will be so dependent on them that turning them offwould amount to suicide.
On the other hand it is possible that human control over the machines may be retained. In that case the average man mayhave control over certain private machines of his own, such as his car or his personal computer, but control over large systemsof machines will be in the hands of a tiny elite -- just as it is today, but with two differences. Due to improved techniques theelite will have greater control over the masses; and because human work will no longer be necessary the masses will besuperfluous, a useless burden on the system. If the elite is ruthless they may simply decide to exterminate the mass ofhumanity. If they are humane they may use propaganda or other psychological or biological techniques to reduce the birth rateuntil the mass of humanity becomes extinct, leaving the world to the elite. Or, if the elite consists of soft-hearted liberals, theymay decide to play the role of good shepherds to the rest of the human race. They will see to it that everyone’s physical needsare satisfied, that all children are raised under psychologically hygienic conditions, that everyone has a wholesome hobby tokeep him busy, and that anyone who may become dissatisfied undergoes “treatment” to cure his “problem.” Of course, life willbe so purposeless that people will have to be biologically or psychologically engineered either to remove their need for thepower process or to make them “sublimate” their drive for power into some harmless hobby. These engineered human beingsmay be happy in such a society, but they most certainly will not be free. They will have been reduced to the status of domesticanimals.
But suppose now that the computer scientists do not succeed in developing artificial intelligence, so that human workremains necessary. Even so, machines will take care of more and more of the simpler tasks so that there will be an increasingsurplus of human workers at the lower levels of ability. (We see this happening already. There are many people who find itdifficult or impossible to get work, because for intellectual or psychological reasons they cannot acquire the level of trainingnecessary to make themselves useful in the present system.) On those who are employed, ever-increasing demands will beplaced: They will need more and more training, more and more ability, and will have to be ever more reliable, conforming anddocile, because they will be more and more like cells of a giant organism. Their tasks will be increasingly specialized, so thattheir work will be, in a sense, out of touch with the real world, being concentrated on one tiny slice of reality. The system willhave to use any means that it can, whether psychological or biological, to engineer people to be docile, to have the abilities thatthe system requires and to “sublimate” their drive for power into some specialized task. But the statement that the people ofsuch a society will have to be docile may require qualification. The society may find competitiveness useful, provided thatways are found of directing competitiveness into channels that serve the needs of the system. We can imagine a future societyin which there is endless competition for positions of prestige and power. But no more than a very few people will ever reachthe top, where the only real power is (see end of paragraph 163). Very repellent is a society in which a person can satisfy hisneed for power only by pushing large numbers of other people out of the way and depriving them of THEIR opportunity forpower.
One can envision scenarios that incorporate aspects of more than one of the possibilities that we have just discussed. Forinstance, it may be that machines will take over most of the work that is of real, practical importance, but that human beingswill be kept busy by being given relatively unimportant work. It has been suggested, for example, that a great development ofthe service industries might provide work for human beings. Thus people would spent their time shining each other’s shoes,driving each other around in taxicabs, making handicrafts for one another, waiting on each other’s tables, etc. This seems to usa thoroughly contemptible way for the human race to end up, and we doubt that many people would find fulfilling lives in suchpointless busy-work. They would seek other, dangerous outlets (drugs, crime, “cults,” hate groups) unless they werebiologically or psychologically engineered to adapt them to such a way of life.
Needless to say, the scenarios outlined above do not exhaust all the possibilities. They only indicate the kinds of outcomesthat seem to us most likely. But we can envision no plausible scenarios that are any more palatable than the ones we’ve justdescribed. It is overwhelmingly probable that if the industrial-technological system survives the next 
to 
years, it will bythat time have developed certain general characteristics: Individuals (at least those of the “bourgeois” type, who are integratedinto the system and make it run, and who therefore have all the power) will be more dependent than ever on largeorganizations; they will be more “socialized” than ever and their physical and mental qualities to a significant extent (possiblyto a very great extent) will be those that are engineered into them rather than being the results of chance (or of God’s will, orwhatever); and whatever may be left of wild nature will be reduced to remnants preserved for scientific study and kept underthe supervision and management of scientists (hence it will no longer be truly wild). In the long run (say a few centuries fromnow) it is likely that neither the human race nor any other important organisms will exist as we know them today, because onceyou start modifying organisms through genetic engineering there is no reason to stop at any particular point, so that themodifications will probably continue until man and other organisms have been utterly transformed.
Whatever else may be the case, it is certain that technology is creating for human beings a new physical and socialenvironment radically different from the spectrum of environments to which natural selection has adapted the human racephysically and psychologically. If man is not adjusted to this new environment by being artificially re-engineered, then he willbe adapted to it through a long and painful process of natural selection. The former is far more likely than the latter.
It would be better to dump the whole stinking system and take the consequences.
The technophiles are taking us all on an utterly reckless ride into the unknown. Many people understand something ofwhat technological progress is doing to us yet take a passive attitude toward it because they think it is inevitable. But we (FC)don’t think it is inevitable. We think it can be stopped, and we will give here some indications of how to go about stopping it.
As we stated in paragraph 
the two main tasks for the present are to promote social stress and instability in industrialsociety and to develop and propagate an ideology that opposes technology and the industrial system. When the system becomessufficiently stressed and unstable, a revolution against technology may be possible. The pattern would be similar to that of theFrench and Russian Revolutions. French society and Russian society, for several decades prior to their respective revolutions,showed increasing signs of stress and weakness. Meanwhile, ideologies were being developed that offered a new world viewthat was quite different from the old one. In the Russian case, revolutionaries were actively working to undermine the oldorder. Then, when the old system was put under sufficient additional stress (by financial crisis in France, by military defeat inRussia) it was swept away by revolution. What we propose is something along the same lines.
It will be objected that the French and Russian Revolutions were failures. But most revolutions have two goals. One is todestroy an old form of society and the other is to set up the new form of society envisioned by the revolutionaries. The Frenchand Russian revolutionaries failed (fortunately!) to create the new kind of society of which they dreamed, but they were quitesuccessful in destroying the old society. We have no illusions about the feasibility of creating a new, ideal form of society. Ourgoal is only to destroy the existing form of society.
But an ideology, in order to gain enthusiastic support, must have a positive ideal as well as a negative one; it must be FORsomething as well as AGAINST something. The positive ideal that we propose is Nature. That is, WILD nature: those aspectsof the functioning of the Earth and its living things that are independent of human management and free of human interferenceand control. And with wild nature we include human nature, by which we mean those aspects of the functioning of the humanindividual that are not subject to regulation by organized society but are products of chance, or free will, or God (depending onyour religious or philosophical opinions).
Nature makes a perfect counter-ideal to technology for several reasons. Nature (that which is outside the power of thesystem) is the opposite of technology (which seeks to expand indefinitely the power of the system). Most people will agree thatnature is beautiful; certainly it has tremendous popular appeal. The radical environmentalists ALREADY hold an ideology thatexalts nature and opposes technology. [
It is not necessary for the sake of nature to set up some chimerical utopia or anynew kind of social order. Nature takes care of itself: It was a spontaneous creation that existed long before any human society,and for countless centuries many different kinds of human societies coexisted with nature without doing it an excessive amountof damage. Only with the Industrial Revolution did the effect of human society on nature become really devastating. To relievethe pressure on nature it is not necessary to create a special kind of social system, it is only necessary to get rid of industrialsociety. Granted, this will not solve all problems. Industrial society has already done tremendous damage to nature and it willtake a very long time for the scars to heal. Besides, even pre-industrial societies can do significant damage to nature.Nevertheless, getting rid of industrial society will accomplish a great deal. It will relieve the worst of the pressure on nature sothat the scars can begin to heal. It will remove the capacity of organized society to keep increasing its control over nature(including human nature). Whatever kind of society may exist after the demise of the industrial system, it is certain that mostpeople will live close to nature, because in the absence of advanced technology there is no other way that people CAN live. Tofeed themselves they must be peasants or herdsmen or fishermen or hunters, etc. And, generally speaking, local autonomyshould tend to increase, because lack of advanced technology and rapid communications will limit the capacity of governmentsor other large organizations to control local communities.
As for the negative consequences of eliminating industrial society -- well, you can’t eat your cake and have it too. To gainone thing you have to sacrifice another.
Most people hate psychological conflict. For this reason they avoid doing any serious thinking about difficult socialissues, and they like to have such issues presented to them in simple, black-and-white terms: THIS is all good and THAT is allbad. The revolutionary ideology should therefore be developed on two levels.
On the more sophisticated level the ideology should address itself to people who are intelligent, thoughtful and rational.The object should be to create a core of people who will be opposed to the industrial system on a rational, thought-out basis,with full appreciation of the problems and ambiguities involved, and of the price that has to be paid for getting rid of thesystem. It is particularly important to attract people of this type, as they are capable people and will be instrumental ininfluencing others. These people should be addressed on as rational a level as possible. Facts should never intentionally bedistorted and intemperate language should be avoided. This does not mean that no appeal can be made to the emotions, but inmaking such appeal care should be taken to avoid misrepresenting the truth or doing anything else that would destroy theintellectual respectability of the ideology.
On a second level, the ideology should be propagated in a simplified form that will enable the unthinking majority to seethe conflict of technology vs. nature in unambiguous terms. But even on this second level the ideology should not be expressedin language that is so cheap, intemperate or irrational that it alienates people of the thoughtful and rational type. Cheap,intemperate propaganda sometimes achieves impressive short-term gains, but it will be more advantageous in the long run tokeep the loyalty of a small number of intelligently committed people than to arouse the passions of an unthinking, fickle mobwho will change their attitude as soon as someone comes along with a better propaganda gimmick. However, propaganda ofthe rabble-rousing type may be necessary when the system is nearing the point of collapse and there is a final struggle betweenrival ideologies to determine which will become dominant when the old world-view goes under.
Prior to that final struggle, the revolutionaries should not expect to have a majority of people on their side. History ismade by active, determined minorities, not by the majority, which seldom has a clear and consistent idea of what it reallywants. Until the time comes for the final push toward revolution [31], the task of revolutionaries will be less to win the shallowsupport of the majority than to build a small core of deeply committed people. As for the majority, it will be enough to makethem aware of the existence of the new ideology and remind them of it frequently; though of course it will be desirable to getmajority support to the extent that this can be done without weakening the core of seriously committed people.
Any kind of social conflict helps to destabilize the system, but one should be careful about what kind of conflict oneencourages. The line of conflict should be drawn between the mass of the people and the power-holding elite of industrialsociety (politicians, scientists, upper-level business executives, government officials, etc.). It should NOT be drawn betweenthe revolutionaries and the mass of the people. For example, it would be bad strategy for the revolutionaries to condemnAmericans for their habits of consumption. Instead, the average American should be portrayed as a victim of the advertisingand marketing industry, which has suckered him into buying a lot of junk that he doesn’t need and that is very poorcompensation for his lost freedom. Either approach is consistent with the facts. It is merely a matter of attitude whether youblame the advertising industry for manipulating the public or blame the public for allowing itself to be manipulated. As amatter of strategy one should generally avoid blaming the public.
One should think twice before encouraging any other social conflict than that between the power-holding elite (whichwields technology) and the general public (over which technology exerts its power). For one thing, other conflicts tend todistract attention from the important conflicts (between power-elite and ordinary people, between technology and nature); foranother thing, other conflicts may actually tend to encourage technologization, because each side in such a conflict wants touse technological power to gain advantages over its adversary. This is clearly seen in rivalries between nations. It also appearsin ethnic conflicts within nations. For example, in America many black leaders are anxious to gain power for AfricanAmericans by placing back individuals in the technological power-elite. They want there to be many black governmentofficials, scientists, corporation executives and so forth. In this way they are helping to absorb the African American subcultureinto the technological system. Generally speaking, one should encourage only those social conflicts that can be fitted into theframework of the conflicts of power-elite vs. ordinary people, technology vs. nature.
But the way to discourage ethnic conflict is NOT through militant advocacy of minority rights (see paragraphs 
29).Instead, the revolutionaries should emphasize that although minorities do suffer more or less disadvantage, this disadvantage isof peripheral significance. Our real enemy is the industrial- technological system, and in the struggle against the system, ethnicdistinctions are of no importance.
The kind of revolution we have in mind will not necessarily involve an armed uprising against any government. It may ormay not involve physical violence, but it will not be a POLITICAL revolution. Its focus will be on technology and economics,not politics. [32]
Probably the revolutionaries should even AVOID assuming political power, whether by legal or illegal means, until theindustrial system is stressed to the danger point and has proved itself to be a failure in the eyes of most people. Suppose forexample that some “green” party should win control of the United States Congress in an election. In order to avoid betraying orwatering down their own ideology they would have to take vigorous measures to turn economic growth into economicshrinkage. To the average man the results would appear disastrous: There would be massive unemployment, shortages ofcommodities, etc Even if the grosser ill effects could be avoided through superhumanly skillful management, still people wouldhave to begin giving up the luxuries to which they have become addicted. Dissatisfaction would grow, the “green” party wouldbe voted out of office and the revolutionaries would have suffered a severe setback. For this reason the revolutionaries shouldnot try to acquire political power until the system has gotten itself into such a mess that any hardships will be seen as resultingfrom the failures of the industrial system itself and not from the policies of the revolutionaries. The revolution againsttechnology will probably have to be a revolution by outsiders, a revolution from below and not from above.
The revolution must be international and worldwide. It cannot be carried out on a nation-by-nation basis. Whenever it issuggested that the United States, for example, should cut back on technological progress or economic growth, people gethysterical and start screaming that if we fall behind in technology the Japanese will get ahead of us. Holy robots! The worldwill fly off its orbit if the Japanese ever sell more cars than we do! (Nationalism is a great promoter of technology.) Morereasonably, it is argued that if the relatively democratic nations of the world fall behind in technology while nasty, dictatorialnations like China, Vietnam and North Korea continue to progress, eventually the dictators may come to dominate the world.That is why the industrial system should be attacked in all nations simultaneously, to the extent that this may be possible. True,there is no assurance that the industrial system can be destroyed at approximately the same time all over the world, and it iseven conceivable that the attempt to overthrow the system could lead instead to the domination of the system by dictators. Thatis a risk that has to be taken. And it is worth taking, since the difference between a “democratic” industrial system and onecontrolled by dictators is small compared with the difference between an industrial system and a non-industrial one. [
Itmight even be argued that an industrial system controlled by dictators would be preferable, because dictator-controlled systemsusually have proved inefficient, hence they are presumably more likely to break down. Look at Cuba.
Revolutionaries might consider favoring measures that tend to bind the world economy into a unified whole. Free tradeagreements like NAFTA and GATT are probably harmful to the environment in the short run, but in the long run they mayperhaps be advantageous because they foster economic interdependence between nations. It will be easier to destroy theindustrial system on a worldwide basis if the world economy is so unified that its breakdown in any one major nation will leadto its breakdown in all industrialized nations.
Some people take the line that modern man has too much power, too much control over nature; they argue for a morepassive attitude on the part of the human race. At best these people are expressing themselves unclearly, because they fail todistinguish between power for LARGE ORGANIZATIONS and power for INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS. It is amistake to argue for powerlessness and passivity, because people NEED power. Modern man as a collective entity -- that is,the industrial system -- has immense power over nature, and we (FC) regard this as evil. But modern INDIVIDUALS andSMALL GROUPS OF INDIVIDUALS have far less power than primitive man ever did. Generally speaking, the vast power of“modern man” over nature is exercised not by individuals or small groups but by large organizations. To the extent that theaverage modern INDIVIDUAL can wield the power of technology, he is permitted to do so only within narrow limits and onlyunder the supervision and control of the system. (You need a license for everything and with the license come rules andregulations.) The individual has only those technological powers with which the system chooses to provide him. HisPERSONAL power over nature is slight.
Primitive INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS actually had considerable power over nature; or maybe it would bebetter to say power WITHIN nature. When primitive man needed food he knew how to find and prepare edible roots, how totrack game and take it with homemade weapons. He knew how to protect himself from heat cold, rain, dangerous animals, etc.But primitive man did relatively little damage to nature because the COLLECTIVE power of primitive society was negligiblecompared to the COLLECTIVE power of industrial society.
Instead of arguing for powerlessness and passivity, one should argue that the power of the INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMshould be broken, and that this will greatly INCREASE the power and freedom of INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS.
Until the industrial system has been thoroughly wrecked, the destruction of that system must be the revolutionaries’ONLY goal. Other goals would distract attention and energy from the main goal. More importantly if the revolutionariespermit themselves to have any other goal than the destruction of technology, they will be tempted to use technology as a toolfor reaching that other goal. If they give in to that temptation, they will fall right back into the technological trap, becausemodern technology is a unified, tightly organized system, so that, in order to retain SOME technology, one finds oneselfobliged to retain MOST technology, hence one ends up sacrificing only token amounts of technology.
Suppose for example that the revolutionaries took “social justice” as a goal. Human nature being what it is, social justicewould not come about spontaneously; it would have to be enforced. In order to enforce it the revolutionaries would have toretain central organization and control. For that they would need rapid long-distance transportation and communication, andtherefore all the technology needed to support the transportation and communication systems. To feed and clothe poor peoplethey would have to use agricultural and manufacturing technology. And so forth. So that the attempt to insure social justicewould force them to retain most parts of the technological system. Not that we have anything against social justice, but it mustnot be allowed to interfere with the effort to get rid of the technological system.
It would be hopeless for revolutionaries to try to attack the system without using SOME modern technology. If nothingelse they must use the communications media to spread their message. But they should use modern technology for only ONEpurpose: to attack the technological system.
Imagine an alcoholic sitting with a barrel of wine in front of him. Suppose he starts saying to himself, “Wine isn’t bad foryou if used in moderation. Why, they say small amounts of wine are even good for you! It won’t do me any harm if I take justone little drink....” Well you know what is going to happen. Never forget that the human race with technology is just like analcoholic with a barrel of wine.
Revolutionaries should have as many children as they can. There is strong scientific evidence that social attitudes are to asignificant extent inherited. No one suggests that a social attitude is a direct outcome of a person’s genetic constitution, but itappears that personality traits are partly inherited and that certain personality traits tend, within the context of our society, tomake a person more likely to hold this or that social attitude. Objections to these findings have been raised, but the objectionsare feeble and seem to be ideologically motivated. In any event, no one denies that children tend on the average to hold socialattitudes similar to those of their parents. From our point of view it doesn’t matter all that much whether the attitudes arepassed on genetically or through childhood training. In either case they ARE passed on.
The trouble is that many of the people who are inclined to rebel against the industrial system are also concerned about thepopulation problems, hence they are apt to have few or no children. In this way they may be handing the world over to the sortof people who support or at least accept the industrial system. To insure the strength of the next generation of revolutionariesthe present generation should reproduce itself abundantly. In doing so they will be worsening the population problem onlyslightly. And the important problem is to get rid of the industrial system, because once the industrial system is gone the world’spopulation necessarily will decrease (see paragraph 167); whereas, if the industrial system survives, it will continue developingnew techniques of food production that may enable the world’s population to keep increasing almost indefinitely.
With regard to revolutionary strategy, the only points on which we absolutely insist are that the single overriding goalmust be the elimination of modern technology, and that no other goal can be allowed to compete with this one. For the rest,revolutionaries should take an empirical approach. If experience indicates that some of the recommendations made in theforegoing paragraphs are not going to give good results, then those recommendations should be discarded.
An argument likely to be raised against our proposed revolution is that it is bound to fail, because (it is claimed)throughout history technology has always progressed, never regressed, hence technological regression is impossible. But thisclaim is false.
We distinguish between two kinds of technology, which we will call small-scale technology and organization-dependenttechnology. Small-scale technology is technology that can be used by small-scale communities without outside assistance.Organization-dependent technology is technology that depends on large-scale social organization. We are aware of nosignificant cases of regression in small-scale technology. But organization-dependent technology DOES regress when thesocial organization on which it depends breaks down. Example: When the Roman Empire fell apart the Romans’ small-scaletechnology survived because any clever village craftsman could build, for instance, a water wheel, any skilled smith couldmake steel by Roman methods, and so forth. But the Romans’ organization- dependent technology DID regress. Theiraqueducts fell into disrepair and were never rebuilt. Their techniques of road construction were lost. The Roman system ofurban sanitation was forgotten, so that not until rather recent times did the sanitation of European cities equal that of AncientRome.
The reason why technology has seemed always to progress is that, until perhaps a century or two before the IndustrialRevolution, most technology was small-scale technology. But most of the technology developed since the IndustrialRevolution is organization-dependent technology. Take the refrigerator for example. Without factory-made parts or thefacilities of a postindustrial machine shop it would be virtually impossible for a handful of local craftsmen to build arefrigerator. If by some miracle they did succeed in building one it would be useless to them without a reliable source ofelectric power. So they would have to dam a stream and build a generator. Generators require large amounts of copper wire.Imagine trying to make that wire without modern machinery. And where would they get a gas suitable for refrigeration? Itwould be much easier to build an icehouse or preserve food by drying or picking, as was done before the invention of therefrigerator.
So it is clear that if the industrial system were once thoroughly broken down, refrigeration technology would quickly belost. The same is true of other organization-dependent technology. And once this technology had been lost for a generation orso it would take centuries to rebuild it, just as it took centuries to build it the first time around. Surviving technical books wouldbe few and scattered. An industrial society, if built from scratch without outside help, can only be built in a series of stages:You need tools to make tools to make tools to make tools .... A long process of economic development and progress in socialorganization is required. And, even in the absence of an ideology opposed to technology, there is no reason to believe thatanyone would be interested in rebuilding industrial society. The enthusiasm for “progress” is a phenomenon peculiar to themodern form of society, and it seems not to have existed prior to the 17th century or thereabouts.
In the late Middle Ages there were four main civilizations that were about equally “advanced”: Europe, the Islamic world,India, and the Far East (China, Japan, Korea). Three of those civilizations remained more or less stable, and only Europebecame dynamic. No one knows why Europe became dynamic at that time; historians have their theories but these are onlyspeculation. At any rate, it is clear that rapid development toward a technological form of society occurs only under specialconditions. So there is no reason to assume that a long-lasting technological regression cannot be brought about.
Would society EVENTUALLY develop again toward an industrial-technological form? Maybe, but there is no use inworrying about it, since we can’t predict or control events 
or 1,
years in the future. Those problems must be dealt withby the people who will live at that time.
Because of their need for rebellion and for membership in a movement, leftists or persons of similar psychological typeoften are unattracted to a rebellious or activist movement whose goals and membership are not initially leftist. The resultinginflux of leftish types can easily turn a non-leftist movement into a leftist one, so that leftist goals replace or distort the originalgoals of the movement.
To avoid this, a movement that exalts nature and opposes technology must take a resolutely anti-leftist stance and mustavoid all collaboration with leftists. Leftism is in the long run inconsistent with wild nature, with human freedom and with theelimination of modern technology. Leftism is collectivist; it seeks to bind together the entire world (both nature and the humanrace) into a unified whole. But this implies management of nature and of human life by organized society, and it requiresadvanced technology. You can’t have a united world without rapid transportation and communication, you can’t make allpeople love one another without sophisticated psychological techniques, you can’t have a “planned society” without thenecessary technological base. Above all, leftism is driven by the need for power, and the leftist seeks power on a collectivebasis, through identification with a mass movement or an organization. Leftism is unlikely ever to give up technology, becausetechnology is too valuable a source of collective power.
The anarchist [
too seeks power, but he seeks it on an individual or small-group basis; he wants individuals and smallgroups to be able to control the circumstances of their own lives. He opposes technology because it makes small groupsdependent on large organizations.
Some leftists may seem to oppose technology, but they will oppose it only so long as they are outsiders and thetechnological system is controlled by non-leftists. If leftism ever becomes dominant in society, so that the technological systembecomes a tool in the hands of leftists, they will enthusiastically use it and promote its growth. In doing this they will berepeating a pattern that leftism has shown again and again in the past. When the Bolsheviks in Russia were outsiders, theyvigorously opposed censorship and the secret police, they advocated self-determination for ethnic minorities, and so forth; butas soon as they came into power themselves, they imposed a tighter censorship and created a more ruthless secret police thanany that had existed under the tsars, and they oppressed ethnic minorities at least as much as the tsars had done. In the UnitedStates, a couple of decades ago when leftists were a minority in our universities, leftist professors were vigorous proponents ofacademic freedom, but today, in those of our universities where leftists have become dominant, they have shown themselvesready to take away from everyone else’s academic freedom. (This is “political correctness.”) The same will happen with leftistsand technology: They will use it to oppress everyone else if they ever get it under their own control.
In earlier revolutions, leftists of the most power-hungry type, repeatedly, have first cooperated with non-leftistrevolutionaries, as well as with leftists of a more libertarian inclination, and later have double-crossed them to seize power forthemselves. Robespierre did this in the French Revolution, the Bolsheviks did it in the Russian Revolution, the communists didit in Spain in 
and Castro and his followers did it in Cuba. Given the past history of leftism, it would be utterly foolish fornon-leftist revolutionaries today to collaborate with leftists.
Various thinkers have pointed out that leftism is a kind of religion. Leftism is not a religion in the strict sense becauseleftist doctrine does not postulate the existence of any supernatural being. But, for the leftist, leftism plays a psychological rolemuch like that which religion plays for some people. The leftist NEEDS to believe in leftism; it plays a vital role in hispsychological economy. His beliefs are not easily modified by logic or facts. He has a deep conviction that leftism is morallyRight with a capital R, and that he has not only a right but a duty to impose leftist morality on everyone. (However, many ofthe people we are referring to as “leftists” do not think of themselves as leftists and would not describe their system of beliefsas leftism. We use the term “leftism” because we don’t know of any better words to designate the spectrum of related creedsthat includes the feminist, gay rights, political correctness, etc., movements, and because these movements have a strongaffinity with the old left. See paragraphs 227-230.)
Leftism is a totalitarian force. Wherever leftism is in a position of power it tends to invade every private corner and forceevery thought into a leftist mold. In part this is because of the quasi-religious character of leftism; everything contrary to leftistbeliefs represents Sin. More importantly, leftism is a totalitarian force because of the leftists’ drive for power. The leftist seeksto satisfy his need for power through identification with a social movement and he tries to go through the power process byhelping to pursue and attain the goals of the movement (see paragraph 83). But no matter how far the movement has gone inattaining its goals the leftist is never satisfied, because his activism is a surrogate activity (see paragraph 41). That is, theleftist’s real motive is not to attain the ostensible goals of leftism; in reality he is motivated by the sense of power he gets fromstruggling for and then reaching a social goal. [
Consequently the leftist is never satisfied with the goals he has alreadyattained; his need for the power process leads him always to pursue some new goal. The leftist wants equal opportunities forminorities. When that is attained he insists on statistical equality of achievement by minorities. And as long as anyone harborsin some corner of his mind a negative attitude toward some minority, the leftist has to re-educated him. And ethnic minoritiesare not enough; no one can be allowed to have a negative attitude toward homosexuals, disabled people, fat people, old people,ugly people, and on and on and on. It’s not enough that the public should be informed about the hazards of smoking; a warninghas to be stamped on every package of cigarettes. Then cigarette advertising has to be restricted if not banned. The activistswill never be satisfied until tobacco is outlawed, and after that it will be alcohol, then junk food, etc. Activists have foughtgross child abuse, which is reasonable. But now they want to stop all spanking. When they have done that they will want to bansomething else they consider unwholesome, then another thing and then another. They will never be satisfied until they havecomplete control over all child rearing practices. And then they will move on to another cause.
Suppose you asked leftists to make a list of ALL the things that were wrong with society, and then suppose you institutedEVERY social change that they demanded. It is safe to say that within a couple of years the majority of leftists would findsomething new to complain about, some new social “evil” to correct because, once again, the leftist is motivated less bydistress at society’s ills than by the need to satisfy his drive for power by imposing his solutions on society.
Because of the restrictions placed on their thoughts and behavior by their high level of socialization, many leftists of theover-socialized type cannot pursue power in the ways that other people do. For them the drive for power has only one morallyacceptable outlet, and that is in the struggle to impose their morality on everyone.
Leftists, especially those of the oversocialized type, are True Believers in the sense of Eric Hoffer’s book, “The TrueBeliever.” But not all True Believers are of the same psychological type as leftists. Presumably a true-believing nazi, forinstance, is very different psychologically from a true-believing leftist. Because of their capacity for single-minded devotion toa cause, True Believers are a useful, perhaps a necessary, ingredient of any revolutionary movement. This presents a problemwith which we must admit we don’t know how to deal. We aren’t sure how to harness the energies of the True Believer to arevolution against technology. At present all we can say is that no True Believer will make a safe recruit to the revolutionunless his commitment is exclusively to the destruction of technology. If he is committed also to another ideal, he may want touse technology as a tool for pursuing that other ideal (see paragraphs 
221).
Some readers may say, “This stuff about leftism is a lot of crap. I know John and Jane who are leftish types and they don’thave all these totalitarian tendencies.” It’s quite true that many leftists, possibly even a numerical majority, are decent peoplewho sincerely believe in tolerating others’ values (up to a point) and wouldn’t want to use high-handed methods to reach theirsocial goals. Our remarks about leftism are not meant to apply to every individual leftist but to describe the general character ofleftism as a movement. And the general character of a movement is not necessarily determined by the numerical proportions ofthe various kinds of people involved in the movement.
The people who rise to positions of power in leftist movements tend to be leftists of the most power-hungry type, becausepower-hungry people are those who strive hardest to get into positions of power. Once the power-hungry types have capturedcontrol of the movement, there are many leftists of a gentler breed who inwardly disapprove of many of the actions of theleaders, but cannot bring themselves to oppose them. They NEED their faith in the movement, and because they cannot give upthis faith they go along with the leaders. True, SOME leftists do have the guts to oppose the totalitarian tendencies that emerge,but they generally lose, because the power-hungry types are better organized, are more ruthless and Machiavellian and havetaken care to build themselves a strong power base.
These phenomena appeared clearly in Russia and other countries that were taken over by leftists. Similarly, before thebreakdown of communism in the, USSR, leftish types in the West would, seldom criticize that country. If prodded they wouldadmit that the USSR did many wrong things, but then they would try to find excuses for the communists and begin talkingabout the faults of the West. They always opposed Western military resistance to communist aggression. Leftish types all overthe world vigorously protested the U.S. military action in Vietnam, but when the USSR invaded Afghanistan they did nothing.Not that they approved of the Soviet actions; but because of their leftist faith, they just couldn’t bear to put themselves inopposition to communism. Today, in those of our universities where “political correctness” has become dominant, there areprobably many leftish types who privately disapprove of the suppression of academic freedom, but they go along with itanyway.
Thus the fact that many individual leftists are personally mild and fairly tolerant people by no means prevents leftism as awhole form having a totalitarian tendency.
Our discussion of leftism has a serious weakness. It is still far from clear what we mean by the word “leftist.” Theredoesn’t seem to be much we can do about this. Today leftism is fragmented into a whole spectrum of activist movements. Yetnot all activist movements are leftist, and some activist movements (e.g., radical environmentalism) seem to include bothpersonalities of the leftist type and personalities of thoroughly un-leftist types who ought to know better than to collaboratewith leftists. Varieties of leftists fade out gradually into varieties of non-leftists and we ourselves would often be hard-pressedto decide whether a given individual is or is not a leftist. To the extent that it is defined at all, our conception of leftism isdefined by the discussion of it that we have given in this article, and we can only advise the reader to use his own judgment indeciding who is a leftist.
But it will be helpful to list some criteria for diagnosing leftism. These criteria cannot be applied in a cut and driedmanner. Some individuals may meet some of the criteria without being leftists, some leftists may not meet any of the criteria.Again, you just have to use your judgment.
The leftist is oriented toward large-scale collectivism. He emphasizes the duty of the individual to serve society and theduty of society to take care of the individual. He has a negative attitude toward individualism. He often takes a moralistic tone.He tends to be for gun control, for sex education and other psychologically “enlightened” educational methods, for socialplanning, for affirmative action, for multi- culturalism. He tends to identify with victims. He tends to be against competitionand against violence, but he often finds excuses for those leftists who do commit violence. He is fond of using the commoncatch-phrases of the left, like “racism,” “sexism,” “homophobia,” “capitalism,” “imperialism,” “neocolonialism,” “genocide,”“social change,” “social justice,” “social responsibility.” Maybe the best diagnostic trait of the leftist is his tendency tosympathize with the following movements: feminism, gay rights, ethnic rights, disability rights, animal rights, politicalcorrectness. Anyone who strongly sympathizes with ALL of these movements is almost certainly a leftist. [36]
The more dangerous leftists, that is, those who are most power-hungry, are often characterized by arrogance or by adogmatic approach to ideology. However, the most dangerous leftists of all may be certain oversocialized types who avoidirritating displays of aggressiveness and refrain from advertising their leftism, but work quietly and unobtrusively to promotecollectivist values, “enlightened” psychological techniques for socializing children, dependence of the individual on thesystem, and so forth. These crypto-leftists (as we may call them) approximate certain bourgeois types as far as practical actionis concerned, but differ from them in psychology, ideology and motivation. The ordinary bourgeois tries to bring people undercontrol of the system in order to protect his way of life, or he does so simply because his attitudes are conventional. Thecrypto-leftist tries to bring people under control of the system because he is a True Believer in a collectivist ideology. Thecrypto-leftist is differentiated from the average leftist of the oversocialized type by the fact that his rebellious impulse isweaker and he is more securely socialized. He is differentiated from the ordinary well-socialized bourgeois by the fact thatthere is some deep lack within him that makes it necessary for him to devote himself to a cause and immerse himself in acollectivity. And maybe his (well-sublimated) drive for power is stronger than that of the average bourgeois.
Throughout this article we’ve made imprecise statements and statements that ought to have had all sorts of qualificationsand reservations attached to them; and some of our statements may be flatly false. Lack of sufficient information and the needfor brevity made it impossible for us to formulate our assertions more precisely or add all the necessary qualifications. And ofcourse in a discussion of this kind one must rely heavily on intuitive judgment, and that can sometimes be wrong. So we don’tclaim that this article expresses more than a crude approximation to the truth.
All the same, we are reasonably confident that the general outlines of the picture we have painted here are roughly correct.Just one possible weak point needs to be mentioned. We have portrayed leftism in its modern form as a phenomenon peculiarto our time and as a symptom of the disruption of the power process. But we might possibly be wrong about this.Oversocialized types who try to satisfy their drive for power by imposing their morality on everyone have certainly beenaround for a long time. But we THINK that the decisive role played by feelings of inferiority, low self-esteem, powerlessness,identification with victims by people who are not themselves victims, is a peculiarity of modern leftism. Identification withvictims by people not themselves victims can be seen to some extent in 19th century leftism and early Christianity but as far aswe can make out, symptoms of low self-esteem, etc., were not nearly so evident in these movements, or in any othermovements, as they are in modern leftism. But we are not in a position to assert confidently that no such movements haveexisted prior to modern leftism. This is a significant question to which historians ought to give their attention.
